The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Observations of Professor Maturin, by
Clyde Furst

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Observations of Professor Maturin

Author: Clyde Furst

Release Date: May 04, 2021 [eBook #65249]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: David E. Brown and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
             Libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OBSERVATIONS OF PROFESSOR
MATURIN ***




The Observations of Professor Maturin




  _Columbia University Press Sales Agents_

  _New York: Lemcke & Buechner
  30-32 West 27th Street_

  _London: Humphrey Milford
  Amen Corner, E.C._




  The Observations of
  Professor Maturin

  By
  Clyde Furst

  [Illustration]

  New York
  Columbia University Press
  1916

  _All rights reserved_




  _Copyright, 1916, by Columbia University Press_

  _Printed March, 1916_

  _Reprinted, by permission, from
  The New York Evening Post_


  _D. B. Updike · The Merrymount Press · Boston_




  Dedicated to
  Professor Maturin’s
  Oldest and Best Friend
  R. E. M.




Table of Contents


 CHAPTER                                        PAGE

      I. _The Staff of Life_                       3

     II. _The Sindbad Society_                    17

    III. _Foreign Travel at Home_                 25

     IV. _Country Life_                           35

      V. _Food for Thought_                       44

     VI. _Beside the Sea_                         54

    VII. _Christmas_                              65

   VIII. _The Sovran Herb_                        75

     IX. _Men’s Faces_                            85

      X. _Mental Hygiene_                         94

     XI. _The Mystery of Dress_                  109

    XII. _Questions at Issue_                    117

   XIII. _The Fountain of Youth_                 122

    XIV. _The Contemporary Fiction Company_      130

     XV. _The Old Doctor_                        137

    XVI. _Breakfasting with Portia_              147

   XVII. _Summer Science_                        157

  XVIII. _Measuring the Mind_                    168

    XIX. _The Club of the Bachelor Maids_        183

     XX. _A Small College_                       192

    XXI. _Old Town Revisited_                    202

   XXII. _The County Fair_                       215




Introduction


It was never my good fortune actually to meet Professor Maturin,
or even to see him, although in the latter case I should instantly
have recognized him, so familiar have I been through my mind’s eye,
at least, with his personal appearance--his slender figure somewhat
stooping with the bodily inclination of the scholar, the clear-cut
features that could only have fitted his clear-cut mind, and the
thoughtful eyes that were their necessary concomitant. I had known, of
course, of his predilection for the Athenaeum, and his habit of dining
at that club of intellectual and gastronomic repute, and I was aware
of his membership in the veracious Sindbad Society whose meetings he
frequently attended; but here, too, and principally from the fact, no
doubt, that I was a member of neither, I had never been able to bring
about the much desired personal acquaintance with him.

Of acquaintance, however, and even of a fairly satisfactory sort, there
has nevertheless been no lack, for I have read much that Professor
Maturin has written, and I have remembered, although inadequately
enough, many of the things that he has said with such understanding
and insight of the real bearing of individual experience, along quite
extraordinarily extended lines, upon the wide problems of human
existence.

It is so much the more a pleasure, accordingly, to me, and as it
will be to all those who have read Professor Maturin before only
sporadically and at intervals, at length to have the opportunity
to read him consecutively, and thus to get those side-lights and
reflections of understanding that can only come with a reasonable
contiguity of statement.

In the present book, moreover, we shall be able to read the sayings of
this philosopher of the cheerful mind as they have been remembered and
recorded by one who, better than any one else at all, knew Professor
Maturin as he thought, and as he spoke, and as he had his being. It
is a record, as it will be very easy to discover, of one who has
thought much and thought well, for there is a great difference, as
we all know, in the quality as well as in the quantity of thinking.
In it all there is an intellectual optimism that inevitably follows
the thought wherever it roams--and it often roams far afield--which
is one of the thrice blessed things of life. If through it all there
runs, as again may clearly be seen, the visible thread of the conscious
pursuit of happiness, Professor Maturin is no mere eudemonist whose
belly is his god and whose goal is pleasure, but rather one who sees
in the attainment of personal happiness the rightful accessory of a
rounded and rational living. And with it all, and notwithstanding
his calling, and in spite of the fact that he himself must have been
conscious of an unusual knowledge which leads him at times even into
the imperilled field of epigram, it is all done, not with a pedantic
air of professorial sophistication, but with genuine human sympathy.
And in this spirit he is commended to that wider circle of readers who
are now to be able to know him.

                                                    WILLIAM H. CARPENTER

  _Columbia University
    February 14, 1916_




The Observations of Professor Maturin




I

_The Staff of Life_


My friend Professor Bedelar Maturin exercises the right of a bachelor
and a man of fifty to a considerable number of eccentricities. All
of these are harmless, since he is by nature a gentleman; and, his
habit being that of a scholar, some of them are of more than ordinary
interest. I very well remember my first learning of that one I am about
to describe. My family having left town for the summer, I found him
dining at the Athenaeum, as I knew him frequently to do for the sake of
detachment from the bachelor ménage he maintains--as much for his books
as for himself--in a house near the river, not far from the university.

He beckoned me to take my already ordered dinner at the particular
corner table for which his preference is always respected by his
fellow Athenians, and, after a smile of greeting, he passed over
to me the book he had been reading--“The Physiology of Taste,” by
Brillat-Savarin--with the quiet comment, “The standard and gauge of
modern civilization.”

I had never before seen the work of that high-priest of gastronomy,
but before examining it I looked my surprise at the apparent enthusiasm
of the scholar whose abstemious habits were well known to his friends,
and whose slender figure, thoughtful eyes, and clear-cut features made
it impossible to associate him with the pleasures of the table. For
reply he merely indicated several of the “Fundamental Truths of the
Science,” on the open page before me:

“But for life the universe were nothing; and all that has life requires
nourishment.”

“The fate of nations depends upon how they are fed.”

“The man of sense and culture alone understands eating.”

I was familiar with Dean Swift’s tracing the origin of certain essays
to the consumption of particular varieties of cheese, and I had read
Maturin’s own whimsical paragraphs explaining the peculiarities of
certain national literatures by the characteristics of their national
beverages, and paralleling the growth of humanitarianism with the
increasing use of tobacco, of which he is sparing; but he seemed now to
be serious, so that I merely asked what he made of such a statement as
the following, which I read from his author: “The discovery of a new
dish does more for the happiness of the human race than the discovery
of a planet.”

Explaining that he would have the author convince me, rather than
himself, he indicated yet another paragraph: “What praise can be
refused the science which sustains us from the cradle to the grave,
which entrances the delights of love and the pleasures of friendship,
which disarms hatred, makes business easier, and affords us, during the
short voyage of our lives, the only enjoyments that both relieve us
from fatigue and themselves entail none!”

“Take it, and read it,” he said, as I looked up. “I know it by heart.”
I gladly accepted the volume, for there was here evidently more than
appeared; but I also expressed the wish that he would, himself, first
tell me more about it; and this, retaking the book, his own dinner
being now finished and mine but about to begin, he proceeded to do.

“I should not need to remind you,” he began, “that I am no friend
to indulgence, much less to so gross a form as over-feeding, nor to
speak of my known antagonism to every form of ignorance--except to
explain that it is for these reasons that I have become an earnest
advocate of gastronomy, which endeavors to transform eating from
the ignorant indulgence it usually is to a reasonable science of
nutrition and a refined art of enjoyment. Whatever popular disesteem
the science and the art still suffer is due either to ignorance of its
serious endeavor, or to a Puritanic attitude that is both inconsistent
and irreverent. The fabric of nature is so constituted that all of
our essential processes are accompanied by pleasure; a thoroughly
consistent ascetic would necessarily cease to exist.

“Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, although of course not the founder of
gastronomy, is its most admirable modern champion. He lived from the
first half of the eighteenth century through the first quarter of the
nineteenth, first as mayor of his native town of Belley in France;
then, during the Revolution, an exile in Switzerland and in America;
and, finally, during the last third of his life, a judge in Paris of
the highest national court. The fame of his professional wisdom and
justice was great, but that of his personal benevolence and geniality
was far greater. The choicest flavor and charm of many years of social
life he preserved in the book he apparently intended to leave, at his
death, as a legacy of good cheer to his friends. The record of his love
of good living was to serve him, a bachelor, as a posterity.

“His fears that so genial a production might seem inconsistent with
his judicial dignity were overcome by arguments which are given in a
prefatory dialogue, and the volume was published anonymously in 1825,
a year before his death. Even in so short a time the book was crowned
with extraordinary popularity. Although one would hesitate, perhaps, to
call it ‘adorable,’ as Balzac did, it is certainly one of those rarely
spontaneous and charming outpourings of personality that belong apart
with White’s ‘Selborne’ and Walton’s ‘Angler.’

“In addition to the Prefatory Dialogue and the Fundamental Truths,
already mentioned, the little volume includes a Preface, thirty
‘Meditations,’ or chapters, and, in conclusion, a dozen narrative and
descriptive ‘Varieties’ bearing upon the subject. The whole amounts to
less than three hundred small pages.

“The earlier chapters on the senses of taste, appetite, and thirst
are largely physiological or psychological, but even here the author
carries out with charm his intention of touching but lightly subjects
likely to be dull. Throughout he practices the preaching of the mad
poet Blake,--‘To particularize is the great distinction of merit,’--and
everywhere he introduces original anecdotes, witticisms, and similar
side-dishes. Although Savarin separates the functions of taste into
direct, complete, and reflective, he finds himself unable to classify
its results further than to suggest some such gradation as,--positive,
beef; comparative, veal; superlative, pheasant. For its greatest
satisfaction one should eat slowly and in minute portions--all that
is valuable of ‘Fletcherism’ in a sentence. Anything else would be
unworthy of our perfected organism, ‘the structure of the tongue of
all animals being analogous to the reach of their intelligence.’
Under ‘Thirst’ there is a similar, but even more daringly imaginative
observation: ‘The desire for fermented liquors and curiosity about
a future state are the two distinctive attributes of man as the
masterpiece of nature.’

“Perhaps the most valuable, certainly the most pleasing, of the
chapters are those on ‘Gastronomy,’ ‘The Love of Good Living,’ ‘People
Fond of Good Living,’ ‘Gastronomic Tests,’ and ‘The Pleasures of the
Table.’

“Gastronomy is defined as ‘the scientific knowledge of all that relates
to man as an eater;’ being founded upon natural history, physics,
chemistry, economics, and cookery, as well as on the sciences already
touched upon; and affecting physically, mentally, and morally, every
individual, of every class of society, every moment of his life. Some
knowledge of it is therefore indispensable to all, and the more as one
ascends the social scale; it being well known that the most momentous
decisions of personal and of national life are made at table.

“‘The Love of Good Living’ is shown to be not merely a physical, but
an intellectual and a moral quality as well, ‘almost deserving to rank
as a virtue;’ opposing excess, developing discrimination, promoting
physical health, and aiding moral resignation to the laws of nature. In
addition, it is an easily and constantly available source of natural
and innocent pleasure in a world of pain.

“People fond of good living, especially physicians, men of letters,
churchmen, and people of sense and culture in general,--others being
incapable of the necessary appreciation and judgment,--always live
longer than ordinary men. Napoleon’s worst defeats were due to his
injudicious diet. The wise in regard to food may usually be known by
their mere appearance, but for cases of doubt Brillat-Savarin suggests
a series of ‘Gastronomic Tests,’ or dishes, of such indisputable
excellence that those who do not instantly respond may immediately be
declared unworthy. Thus: For a small income, filet of veal larded with
bacon, or sauerkraut bristling with sausages; for a moderate income,
filet of beef with gravy, or boiled turbot; for a generous income,
truffled turkey, or stuffed pike with cream of prawns. It is important
in these tests that generous portions be provided, for quantity as well
as quality has its effect.

“The conclusion of the meditation ‘On the Pleasures of the Table’ must
be quoted entire, so worthy is it of a place in ‘The Golden Book of
Hospitality:’ ‘Let the number of guests be small, that the conversation
may be constantly general; of various occupations, but analogous
tastes; the men of wit without pretension, the women pleasant, but not
coquettish. Let the dishes be few but choice, and the wines of the
first quality; the order from the more substantial to the lighter, the
simpler to the finer flavors. Let the meal proceed without hurry or
bustle; the coffee be hot, the liqueurs chosen with care. Let the room
to which the guests retire be large enough for cards, for those who
cannot do without them, while leaving ample scope for conversation;
the guests animated with the hope of still further pleasure. Then let
the tea be not too strong, the toast artistically buttered, the punch
skilfully made. Finally, let nobody leave before eleven, and everybody
be in bed by twelve.’

“After reaching such an elevation, Brillat-Savarin wisely follows
the dramatic principle of relief, by introducing anecdotes of the
halts of a hunting party, and chapters on digestion, rest, sleep, and
dreams. His observations and illustrations are always interesting and
picturesque, frequently very suggestive, and sometimes strikingly
modern--as when he says, ‘Digestion, of all the bodily functions, has
most influence on the morale of the individual;’ when he recommends for
sleeping an airy room, no bed curtains, and light but warm coverings;
or when he discusses foods that produce sleep, and those that induce
pleasant dreams.

“The theme of the meditation ‘On Corpulence’--‘The great majority of us
eat and drink too much’--is of such general and permanent applicability
that it is rediscovered every decade and announced with trumpets.
The chapter ‘On the Prevention or Cure of Corpulence’ outlines the
diet by means of which for thirty years the author kept that tendency
in himself ‘to the limit of the imposing’--a statement that his
portrait well bears out. After a counter meditation on leanness,
some felicitations over the decline of fasting, and an excursus on
‘Exhaustion and Death’--‘Death itself being not unaccompanied by
pleasure when it is natural’--the author is again ready for a higher
flight.

“This occurs in the longest chapters of the book, in the form of ‘A
Philosophical History of Cookery, Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern,’ with
an appendix, ‘On Parisian Dining-Houses.’ Here, indeed, is richness:
the advantages and disadvantages of eating raw meat; the primitive
feasting in the ‘Iliad;’ the advent of boiling in the Old Testament;
how Cadmus brought the alphabet and good cooking to Greece; the
elaborate and sometimes strange taste of the Romans,--as for dormice
and assafoetida,--and a survey of the ancient literature of the
subject, from the fragmentary poem on gastronomy by Archestratus, to
the convivial poetry of Horace and Tibullus. The whole story is told,
although briefly, excepting only the peculiar taste of the Greeks for
mingling sea-water and turpentine with their wines.

“The mediaeval and modern development of the art is sketched, although
of necessity more rapidly, from the rescue of cookery from barbarism
by Charlemagne; through the introduction of spices from the East,
garlic from Palestine, parsley from Italy, coffee from Turkey, and
the potato from America; to the ages of pastry and of sugar, and the
final culmination of the art in political gastronomy. Every line of
this section contains such good things as ‘coffee should be crushed,
not ground;’ and, ‘It was Talleyrand who first brought from Italy the
custom of taking Parmesan cheese with soup.’ But to select would be to
quote the whole.

“Restaurants--unhappily Savarin could not know the modern derivation
from _res_ and _taurus_--appear to have been invented in Paris in 1770.
There is a fascinating picture of the best of the author’s time, with
three hundred dishes and a hundred wines; a height of eloquence over
the cosmopolitan sources of a good dinner; and yet higher soaring over
the Parisian missionaries of the doctrine throughout the civilized
world.

“Nor does inspiration wane in the chapter on ‘Gastronomic Principles
Put into Practice’--‘the treasures of nature were not created to be
trodden under foot ... a good dinner is but little dearer than a bad
one ... a man may show himself a distinguished connoisseur without
going beyond the limits of his actual needs.’

“The last chapter, ‘Gastronomic Mythology,’ is pure creation--of
Gasterea, the tenth muse, her nature, habit, aspect, and worship; and
then--for like Donne, ‘when he is done, he is not done, for there is
more’--comes a ‘Transition:’ ‘In writing I had a double object ...
to lay down the fundamental theory of gastronomy, so that she would
take her place among the sciences in that rank to which she has an
incontestable right. The second, to define with precision what must be
understood by the love of good living, so that for all time that social
quality may be kept apart from gluttony and intemperance, with which
many have absurdly confounded it.’

“Finally follow the generous dozen of short ‘varieties’--anecdotes
like ‘The Curé’s Omelette;’ personal experiences of ‘The Gastronome
Abroad,’ some in America; original recipes and original verse; and an
‘Historical Elegy,’ in pity for the gastronomic ignorance of the past,
and in prophetic vision of the full gastronomic glories of the year
nineteen hundred.

“But, alas,” said Professor Maturin, slowly closing the book, “I cannot
wish that he were here. The world is not yet ready for his message;
he should have added another hundred years. It was fifty years before
his work was well enough known outside of France to be translated;
and even to-day, in spite of all its delightful qualities, not one in
a hundred, even among reading men, know it. And yet, there has never
been anything quite like it. Such a rare combination of race, time, and
personality; of experience, cultivation, and taste, seldom occurs more
than once. But no other is necessary; nothing can be better than the
best, and Savarin has handled his theme with unapproachable wisdom and
charm, once for all.

“The science has, of course, progressed immensely since his day. You
may fill your shelves with portentous tomes on food and dietetics,
and with experimental pamphlets from the Department of Agriculture.
Educators have introduced instruction concerning food into the
curriculum of the modern school. And I understand that there are
magazines of practical cookery for such ladies as look to the affairs
of their households. But as for Brillat-Savarin’s hope that the science
and the art of gastronomy, as he elaborated it, would soon become a
part of the faith and practice, the delight as well as the duty, of all
cultivated people,--that is yet far from fulfilment.

“But, my good friend,” and here Professor Maturin rose, shaking his
long forefinger, “the truth will undoubtedly prevail, ‘though long
deferred, though long deferred,’ as Lanier says. Take the book, and
keep it--I make a practice of distributing copies--read it; you
cannot help doing so at a single sitting; talk about it; become, like
me, a propagandist, and the blessing of Gasterea will go with you.
Good-night.” And he was gone.

My friend Professor Maturin spoke the very truth. I finished the book
before I left my seat, and then and there became a fellow equestrian
to Banbury Cross. Deliberately and with prepensive aforethought, I
invite the reader to do the same, and thereby to gain not only personal
pleasure and profit, but, in addition, the greater satisfaction of
contributing a lasting good to others.




II

_The Sindbad Society_


The writer recently enjoyed the great privilege of being the guest of
his friend, Professor Maturin, at a meeting of the Sindbad Society, an
organization for the enjoyment of informal discussion concerning the
theory and practice, the graces and the usefulness, of foreign travel.

Similar in purpose to the Travellers’ Club of London, but lacking
anything like the equipment of that body’s sumptuous Pall Mall home,
the Sindbad Society endeavors to fulfil its function by means of
occasional dinners in the private rooms of other clubs. Indeed, I was
given to understand that the members were unanimous in considering
a local habitation, or immovable property of any sort, to be most
inappropriate for a club the very essence of which was peregrination.
My neighbor at the large round dinner table averred that to own even a
portrait of Sindbad the Sailor, the mythical founder and patron of the
club, would be to embody in a concrete object sentiments of value only
so long as they animated the mind.

As we took our places at table, it became evident, in spite of the
recreative character of the club, that here was no body of amateurs, to
whom travel meant merely London and Paris, the Rhine and the Riviera.
I recognized a former director of the American School in Rome, an
artist and a craftsman who had just returned from Japan and India, an
importer of things Persian, and a biologist who spent half his time in
the South Seas. Professor Maturin described the other members to me as
an engineer who had developed oil wells in China, an archaeologist who
directed excavations in Syria, former secretaries of legation at St.
Petersburg and at Constantinople, an army officer from Manila, and an
explorer who had climbed everything but the mountains of the moon.

The dinner, although entirely without pose, was intentionally and
interestingly exotic. Russian preserved cucumbers and a soup of
chestnuts from the south of France were followed by an entrée of lamb,
prepared according to a Constantinople recipe, and by boned capon. The
colonel mixed a Filipino salad-dressing, and with it the archaeologist
supplied cigarettes made of coffee leaves. Finally, the engineer
introduced a South American dessert of ripe red bananas, guava jelly,
and sharp cheese, and with this was served Carlsbad burnt-fig coffee.
The wines, although poured sparingly, were as interesting as the food.
The cigars were Cuban vegueras. The endeavor, which was surely realized
throughout, had evidently been to seek the unusual, not for the sake
of mere strangeness, but for an excellence unattainable through the
ordinary.

The same might be said of the talk which accompanied the meal. It
was anything but conscious or formal, and yet I noticed that leading
questions were not only allowed but expected, and that it was the
custom of the entire company to listen when any conversation became
generally interesting. In this way I enjoyed a whole series of
descriptions of forests and mountains, rivers and deserts, of barbarous
and unfrequented countries, of harbors and fortifications, cities and
courts, cathedrals and colleges, libraries and museums; with anecdotes
of experience and adventure, of state and society, of beautiful women
and distinguished men.

The near distance of Europe was by no means forgotten, but it was
discussed in a way that made me feel that I must, in Bacon’s phrase,
have gone there “hooded,” or, at least, as the mythical American who
checked off each city in his Baedeker after a hurried glance about
him from the top of some tall building. In particular, I was possessed
with successive desires to make good my deficiencies by going at once
to live at a wonderful small hotel across the river in Paris, visiting
a certain sculptor’s studio in Madrid, dreaming on the terraces of Lake
Maggiore, and hearing the opera by telephone at Budapest. When the talk
ranged more widely, as it did for the most part, I longed to observe
a volcano and experience an earthquake in action, and determined to
journey without delay to Damascus for the sake of its baths and cafés,
“the most exquisitely luxurious in the world;” that is, if I did not
decide, instead, for Shepherd’s hotel at Cairo, or, perhaps, the vale
of Thingvalla in Iceland.

With the cigars, the conversation shifted from details of observation
and experience, by way of penetrative comment on men and manners,
until it reached what seemed, at least to me, profound conclusions
concerning national and social characteristics. The classical scholar,
with a majority of the other members, opposed the craftsman and the
engineer, in ascribing a certain monotony and shallowness to Japanese
life, in spite of its old aestheticism and its new efficiency. Both of
the diplomats endorsed the Persian specialist’s statement that “the
hope of the East is in Western inoculation; it will never regenerate
itself.” “Nor be regenerated,” growled the colonel. “From my point of
view,” replied the artist, “it has no need to. Nature is the absolute
artist, and nowhere else do people live so close to her. Rare natural
beauty, a constant sun, and a mellow atmosphere give existence there
such an intensity and richness that mere living becomes an art--‘pure
pomegranate, not banana,’ as they say in Egypt.” “It takes the eyes
of love to see angels,” concluded the archaeologist. “Natural savages
may be noble, but effete races are not, and such most of the Eastern
peoples seem to me. However, I may be wrong, or at least narrow;
toleration is the great lesson of travel.”

After a number of such discussions, which were listened to by all, the
company returned by general consent to more specific topics--plans,
principally, for future journeys. These had but a melancholy interest
for me, who had not the remotest hope of realizing any of them, until
the conversation became once more general in outlining an ideal rapid
journey around the world. This whirled me past Honolulu palm trees and
craters, amid Japanese cherry-blossoms and wistaria, along the Great
Wall of China, through Canton gardens and bazaars, into Calcutta
palaces and Delhi temples, by dahabeah in Egypt and camel in Syria,
until I caught my breath once more in the midst of the Mediterranean.

But the most valuable part of the evening, and to me the most
enjoyable, if satisfaction is to be measured by what one remembers
longest, was the concluding half-hour, when every member of the group,
quite unconsciously I am sure, fell to felicitating every other member
on the success of the evening, the value of travel, and the pleasure
and profit of thus discussing it.

I had, myself, experienced vicariously some of the delights of filling
in the blank spaces on the map of the world with picturesque scenes
and animated figures. I had noted with interest how the habit of
observation seemed to lead inevitably to comparison, and that to
generalization and conclusion. It had been no small satisfaction to
learn how adequately the human frame and mind had met and withstood
the severer experiences of the more daring--how small, after all, were
the world’s greatest difficulties and dangers to the unconquerable
spirit. But it was most gratifying of all to realize that the general
experience had resulted not in distrust, but in belief in the
fundamental kindliness, if not goodness, of general human nature; and
in a firm conviction that the world as a whole was visibly advancing in
material, mental, and moral well-being.

I had, naturally, never questioned the charm of travel as a recreation,
but this evening gave me a new sense of its superior value as
experience and education. I knew, of course, that travel required
no ordinary equipment of perception, knowledge, and judgment--of
sensitiveness to impressions, with material to compare and ability to
value; that indifferent travel would serve only, as Rousseau said of
indifferent reading, “to make presumptuous ignoramuses.” But, although
I had long believed that the observant and thoughtful home-keeping man
might attain an understanding of himself and even of his nation, I came
now to doubt that there was any means other than foreign travel for
developing a realization of what is really fundamental to the general
human spirit.

In voicing to Professor Maturin my gratitude for the pleasure and
profit of the evening, I found that he had observed me growing a trifle
stale, and had designedly administered this meeting as a remedy. He
expressed his opinion that I was already out of danger, judging from
my evident appreciation, with Shakespeare, that “a good traveller
is something at the latter end of a dinner.” And he beamed on me as
mellowly as the moon when, at parting, I expressed my intention of
continuing the medicine, homoeopathically, through books of travel,
until my wonted tone was entirely restored. The whole prescription
worked such wonders as a tonic that I strongly recommend it to others.




III

_Foreign Travel at Home_


“I thank you,” said Professor Maturin, laying aside the manuscript
he had been reading me, in order to test its appeal,--“I thank you.
I am only afraid that you are too generous. But, in any case, I am
very grateful, and I hope that you will allow me to be at your service
during the remainder of the evening. Do I not see you looking somewhat
dispirited again? Are you not neglecting your mental hygiene?” and,
leaning forward from his circle of lamplight, he peered at me anxiously.

I replied with one affirmative for both queries, but pleaded misfortune
rather than fault. I knew that I was in serious need of variety, but
I had found that the specific he had recommended--the atmosphere of
foreign travel--no longer satisfied the demand. On the contrary, it
aggravated my distemper, by adding to an already overpowering sense
of monotony an impossible desire to fly to the uttermost parts of the
earth. Books of travel and my friends’ discussions of their coming
journeys merely increased my distress.

“So-o?” said Professor Maturin. “So-o-o?” leaning back in his huge
leather chair, and putting his finger and thumb tips together. “Well,
I suspected as much, and I fear that I am at least partly to blame for
your condition. I prescribed a remedy that you have come to find worse
than the disease, and, apparently, you have come at the same time to a
new realization of Stevenson’s saying that ‘books are all very well in
their way, but they are a mighty bloodless substitute for life’--not
that I would be disrespectful to my best friends,” and he smiled at the
well-filled shelves which extend around his admirable library.

“You will not think me unsympathetic when I say that I have been
waiting for this symptom,” he continued. “It is an important part of
your cure. Some day I will explain to you my entire system of mental
hygiene, but there is not time for that to-night, nor are you quite
ready for it until you act upon my next and final recommendation.

“You will remember that Emerson said, ‘Our first journeys discover to
us the indifference of places. The truest visions, the best spectacles
I have seen, I might have had at home.’ He did not himself practice his
preachment, but that does not invalidate it. Kant, however, I believe,
never travelled more than forty miles from Königsberg; and Sainte-Beuve
for fifty years seldom left Paris. What, of course, one wants is not to
subject himself to the miscellaneous and often distracting impacts of
foreign travel, but to realize What essential elements he needs, where
to find, and how to apply them. As one of our poets has put it:

  _Who journeys far may lack the seeing eye:
  Stay, thou, and know what wonders round thee lie._

“At one time in my life I travelled continually. But now that I am
older and wiser, I know that I can find practically everything I want
here at home. At different times I want an almost infinite variety
of things, but they are all here in New York. This city is the true
cosmopolis: eighty nations are represented in its public schools;
four-fifths of the parents of its citizens came from the ends of the
earth; there are more than a million Germans; more than a million
Irish; more, and vastly more fortunate Hebrews than in all Palestine;
and so on--you know the figures.

“Now, I need not insist that what is most important in foreign travel
is not the novel sensations to which it gives rise,--the sense of a
different climate, the flavor of new dishes, the fragrance of strange
flowers, the sound of unfamiliar music, even the sight of ancient
buildings or famous pictures--pleasurable and profitable as all of
these are; and, fortunately, most of them may be enjoyed here, directly
or indirectly. The fundamental value of travel is in the realization
that it gives of ways of feeling, thinking, and acting, other than our
own; and these, along with many of their outward manifestations, our
new Americans bring with them.

“Thus, for example, if you are weary of the physical and mental traits
of a land where all things are yet new, you may find the inscrutable
calm of the immemorial East in Chinatown, where life flows as it did
before Confucius. The ceremonial prescribed by Moses is still carried
out here in many synagogues, and I can introduce you to more than one
turbaned swami who will talk like Buddha. Unfortunately, our best
illustration of the rigid solidity of the Egyptian spirit vanished when
the old Tombs prison was torn down, but there is still the obelisk in
the Park; and if you read Rossetti’s poem in the midst of the New York
Historical Society’s Assyrian marbles, you will surely feel yourself in
ancient Nineveh.

“If material crudities or social unrest distress you, you have but to
reopen your Aeschylus or your Cicero to recall the balanced strength
and fineness of Greece, the early law and order of Rome. Our nearest
approaches to Greek architecture are perhaps the porticoes of the
Sub-Treasury and the Columbia Library, or the choragic Soldiers and
Sailors Monument on Riverside Drive. But from time to time the local
Greeks revive their ancient games and enact their classic dramas--for
particulars, see their newspaper, _Atlantis_, if you read modern
Greek. As for Rome, High Bridge might fitly stand on the Campagna, or
Washington Arch by the Forum; and for both, the Metropolitan Museum is
full of casts of sculpture and of actual remains, from the Etruscan
chariot to whole walls from Pompeii.

“Would you reap anew the fruits of the Teutonic invasion, you need only
observe how it has brought force and endurance, solidity and creature
comfort, family affection and social sentiment, good humor and good
sense, to New York, as it did to Rome. The city would not be itself,
without its delicatessen shops or its Christmas trees; much less
without German scholarship or German music--Wagner and Beethoven having
become ours even more than Berlin’s.

“Or, if you prefer oil to butter,--that is, are Latin rather than
Teutonic in temper,--you may cultivate your mood by a morning with
the tower of Madison Square Garden, which is a copy of the Giralda at
Seville, and an afternoon in the new Hispanic Museum in Audubon Park.
For mediaeval Italy you need but read your Dante in the Church of the
Paulist Fathers. For the Renaissance, as for the Gothic, you may study
the architecture of any one of a score of our public buildings, or the
sculpture and painting in the Metropolitan Museum. Rome itself has now
no more Italian citizens than New York, and it hears far less Italian
music. While as for French music, French art, French cookery, and
French amenity--we have appropriated them as thoroughly as we have the
name Lafayette. Our rich men imitate French châteaux; the rest of us
bless or revile the French invention of the apartment house.

“Or, if you hold rather to the Anglo-Saxon temper: the English
satisfaction in the serious, the solid, the useful; the English habit
of accumulation, experiment, and certain conclusion; and the English
ideals of physical and mental health and exercise--these traits and
their tangible results are happily still so native to us that they can
in no sense be considered foreign.

“But even should your need or desire be for the mere sensations of
foreign travel, these also may be had in New York. You may taste
strange dishes and hear strange music in more foreign cafés in New
York than in any other city in the world. In the local shop of the
Bosnian-Herzegovinian tobacco monopoly you may smoke a water-pipe,
calling it hookah, chibouque, or nargileh, according to the place
in which you would like to be. You may eat real spaghetti and see
marionettes enact the story of Roland on Macdougal Street. You need
go no farther east than the East Side to buy Damascus inlaid metals,
or Chinese medallion ware, or Japanese flowered playing-cards. It
is possible, even, to become an importer in a small way, by buying
for five dollars, on Allen Street, Russian brasses that cost seven
dollars and fifty cents when transported to Twenty-second Street, or
ten dollars and seventy-five cents when they arrive on Fifth Avenue.
You may hear the service of the Greek Catholic Church, celebrated by
an archbishop, in a cathedral on Ninety-seventh Street. Bohemians,
Syrians, and even Egyptians have made whole sections of the city
practically their own, so far as manners and customs are concerned.
Nearly one hundred newspapers and periodicals are published in New
York in more than a score of foreign tongues. Perhaps you would care to
read a New York daily that is printed in Arabic?”

Rising, Professor Maturin drew from a drawer and held before me a copy
of _Kawkab Amerika_, a goodly-sized sheet, in strange characters, but
with a pictured heading eloquent to all. There I saw the desert, with
mosques to the right, and pyramids and Sphinx to the left. Between were
hosts of desert-dwellers, on foot, on horseback, on camel, but all
gazing and pointing to the central sky, where appeared a radiant vision
of our harbor statue of Liberty Enlightening the World.

“And it is no mirage to them,” said Professor Maturin, after a pause,
“and that is the best of it all to me. The strangeness of these
newcomers is, indeed, refreshing, but I like better to think of
them as most of them really are, or soon will be--the most genuine
of Americans. They are so through choice and, often, hard endeavor;
you and I, perhaps, only through accident. You know the fundamental
loyalty of the typical German-American. The Spanish press of the city
was staunchly American during our last war. The Turkish periodicals
applauded our demonstrations against the Porte; and Hungarians,
Servians, Syrians, and Persians have each formally organized for the
purpose of influencing their fatherlands to become more like the land
of their adoption.

“And so we come to the most valuable of all the ends of travel--the
greater realization and appreciation of home. We return from other
nations with relief--for there are few American emigrants--to a yet
new land of fertile soil and mineral wealth; to a people varied, yet
homogeneous, energetic, aggressive, ingenious, and self-reliant.
We face, it is true, problems such as the world has never known
before, but with unprecedented belief in idealism, morality, order,
and education; not apprehensive of danger, but quick in recognizing
and decisive in meeting it. Our successes in transportation, in
architecture, and in material well-being in general; our achievement
of the welfare of the whole people over that of section or class, of
equality of opportunity for each and of benevolence toward all, have
already taught the whole world new lessons of peace, tolerance, and
faith in the average man. Nor do I see any reason, as we become more
and more a new race, blended of many, why our good fortunes should not
continue and increase. Anything else would falsify our trust in a wide
and a wise humanity--and that is unthinkable.

“But, I beg your pardon,” said Professor Maturin, as I rose to say
good-night, “I did not mean to take the stump; and yet, I believe that
it is good sometimes to give utterance to these things which all of
us feel. Nothing revives the vigor of one’s spirit like the conscious
realization of being in harmony with fundamental law.”




IV

_Country Life_


I have never seen my friend Professor Maturin in better health or
spirits than he was when I met him the other evening at the Athenaeum.
He had just finished dinner, and indicated that he was in the mood for
talk by ordering two of the Cuban vegueras that he keeps in a private
box at the club, for use on special occasions.

“I am just back from the best vacation I have ever had,” he began.
“I have been spending a month with a friend up the river, at a most
delightful place, built and planted about fifty years ago by his
father, from memories of the villas about Florence, where he once
lived. The house has window balconies, a tower, a loggia opening west
and south, and a red-flagged terrace with a stone balustrade, all
complete. Below this slopes a wide lawn, then many flowering shrubs,
and finally splendid groupings of trees between and over which you may
see the river, here at its widest. The hills beyond and the highlands
to the north complete the picture.

“After breakfasting alone, at any time my fancy chose, according to
the happy custom of the house, I spent whole mornings on the terrace,
looking through the aisles of ancient oaks at the river, or at the
heaped-up summer clouds as they drifted south. I have heard the Hudson
called epic, because of its breadth and power. It is no less so in its
incidental embellishments of sunlight and shadow. I often watched it
from its morning silver, through all shades of reflected blue, until at
night it looked like a texture of royal purple into which the moonlight
and the stars were being woven. The clouds were better than any Alpine
mountains. Their mass and light and dark were as definite, and they
had other clouds about their peaks and oceans of vapor at their feet.
In addition they changed constantly, and turned to gold and opal at
evening.

“At luncheon, or shortly before, I met my host and hostess. If before,
we often strolled through a catalpa avenue to a semi-circular stone
seat overlooking the river, or along a pine walk to a lookout toward
the highlands, or past an orchard back of the house to a certain sunset
hill, for the widest view of all, where we could see the river for
twenty miles. Sometimes the hostess led us to sections which she called
‘nature’s gardens,’ because of the wild flowers, of which she was
particularly fond.

“About such flowers I knew so little that I would have been tempted
to revive my ancient botany had I not a good while ago learned the
necessity of limiting the number of one’s avocations and of resisting
the temptation to rob them of time, to spend on this new thing
and that. I felt the same way about the trees, which, I was told,
represented every indigenous variety. I knew by name only oak and
elm, beech and maple, and a few others; but I made the most of the
compensations of my ignorance, by noting, with all the freshness of
discovery, the characteristic angle or curve of the different boughs,
the varied form, texture, and characteristic movement of branch and
leaf, the innumerable greens of the foliage, and their infinite
modulations under light and shade.

“I am sure that we often know too much to get the full value of our
impressions. For a long time painters could not represent trees because
they remembered what each leaf was like; Claude painted his landscapes
from what he knew, rather than what he saw, Constable from what he
loved, Turner from what he imagined. It was not until the Barbizon men
lived in the forest that Rousseau caught the actual form and Corot the
fragrance of nature, and Monet could paint true light and air. It is
said that the most interesting writing is done by generally cultivated
people concerning subjects that are new to them. The greatest enjoyment
of nature often comes in the same way. It is quite possible to be
‘connoisseured out of one’s senses.’

“At our luncheons the talk was always delightful, for my friend’s ample
fortune gives him both occupation enough to keep him contemporary, and
leisure enough to allow him to be Coleridge’s ideal man of letters,
reaping only the choicest and most spontaneous growths of a richly
cultivated mind. After luncheon we usually sat awhile in the large,
although simple, conservatory, which adjoined the dining-room--if the
word ‘simple’ may properly be applied to a place where orange and
lemon trees attained their natural size, roses bloomed by the hundred,
and where we picked ripe pomegranates and figs for our dessert. This,
too, was due to the genius of the founder of the house, whose works my
friend delighted to honor and cherish.

“When we separated again I usually retired to my room for a book and a
nap, which lasted I know not how long, one of the charms of the place
being that artificial timepieces were absent, or, at least, invisible
and inaudible, everything, apparently, being regulated by the sun.
This source of light and heat usually led me in the late afternoon
to the loggia to watch the earliest anticipations of the evening
glow, and to listen to an orchestra of mocking-birds in an open-air
cage, accompanied by their wild neighbors, of whom there seemed to be
multitudes. English sparrows were ruthlessly banished, but every other
sort of bird was protected, with the reward of the almost familiar
companionship of orioles, cardinals, wrens, and humming-birds, and the
constant song of warbler, thrush, and meadow-lark. In nothing, I think,
is the country more delightfully different from the town than in its
sounds. Even the winds and the rains sound different there.

“My friend has so long lived his life with nature that it has become
the theme of his chief study. He outlined this to me one evening when
the rain caused us to transfer our coffee from the terrace to the
conservatory, where his ideas became permanently associated with the
impressions of azalea bloom and jasmine fragrance which I acquired at
the same time.

“‘I am slowly accumulating,’ he said, ‘facts and ideas for a history
of the relations between nature and man in the United States. The
conditions have been peculiar, and the results more than ordinarily
interesting. Nowhere else, for example, have people possessing all
the arts of civilization made their homes in the midst of absolutely
primitive nature. With such a beginning, three thousand years of
history have here been epitomized in three hundred. Nature as an enemy
was soon conquered, and nowhere else has she afterward shown herself
more friendly in surface fertility and underground resources. Our vast
and relatively undiversified territory has brought men of the coast,
the mountains, and the plains; of the rugged North and the languorous
South, into closer and more constant contact than ever before. And
to this unparalleled interplay we have welcomed myriads from every
other climate and condition on the earth, and have set up for the
whole theories of government which allow almost perfect freedom to all
racial, local, and individual traits.

“‘I intend to deal but briefly with the physical results of such
inhabitation. The wisdom of experience is beginning to check the
perhaps natural tendency to spoil ruthlessly the conquered forest;
and even the most materially minded are beginning to act toward the
universal mother no more harshly than they would toward a captive or
slave whose usefulness is increased by considerate treatment.

“‘The peculiar relations between nature and the human spirit in the
United States, however, seem to me worthy of extended study. Thus,
it is undoubtedly because of our unique environment, that so just an
observer as Emerson found American perceptions keener than any he met
with elsewhere. Our poets have certainly recorded other and more varied
aspects of nature than their English brethren, who in comparison seem
to deal chiefly with the “common or garden variety.” Nothing is more
mistaken than to consider Bryant a kind of inferior Wordsworth. There
is more truth in the remark that Wordsworth himself was not primarily
a nature poet, since nature was to him chiefly the source of certain
stimuli to the mental life, which was his fundamental interest.
Bryant not only feels this stimulus, along with nature’s suggestive
and representative qualities, and its physical benefits; but he also
apprehends nature as an independent world of physical life and order,
of which man is a citizen so far as he is a creature, and of which he
may be a ruler so far as his mind works in harmony with natural law,
and partakes of the power behind it.

“‘This aspect of nature was not, I believe, apprehended by Wordsworth
at all. He at least gave no utterance to it. Similarly, in the
treatment of the water-world, in which English poets have usually
excelled, the English critic Henley has shown how Longfellow, through
a simple self-forgetfulness in his impressions, found eternal beauties
hitherto unnoticed. Emerson’s nature-teaching is fairly well known, but
the depth and breadth of Whitman’s sympathy for land and sea has yet
to be generally appreciated; and these poets are only a few of many
examples.

“‘American painting, too, has found itself in landscape; our sculpture
and music have drawn inspiration from aboriginal life; and our natural
science is second to none in its careful, accurate, and tireless study.

“‘The special field in which we may learn from the older world is in
the employment of nature as the material of art; and for this with our
advance in wealth and leisure, we are now ready. Roman, Italian, and
English examples have already been followed in making real for us some
of Poe’s visions of cultivated landscape; and I am daily expecting
those delightful intellectual and aesthetic results which have always
come when men, wearied with the cultivation of cities, retire to the
contrasting peace, simplicity, and beauty of nature.’

“There were, of course,” continued Professor Maturin, “many other
general ideas in my friend’s system, and he has accumulated a vast
hoard of particular facts to illustrate them. The last aspect of the
subject, however, continued to interest me most; for I was experiencing
hourly the truth of what he said concerning the thaumaturgic, healing
power of nature. I never felt such gentle and cumulative refreshment in
my life. The varied sensations of travel, which is perhaps the favorite
form of recreation, merely whip the jaded spirit into new activity. But
these peaceful, natural scenes and sounds allow the senses to relax,
and the mind to renew its texture and recover its tone. As Browning
puts it,

                                _my soul
  Smoothed itself out, a long-cramped scroll._

I have experienced a real re-creation.

“Therefore,” concluded Professor Maturin, as we finished our cigars,
“you must not be surprised if, within the next few weeks, I compose
a pastoral symphony, or become a new Theocritus, or--what is less
unlikely--retire to a villa, as Horace did.”




V

_Food for Thought_


I was just ordering dinner at the Athenaeum when Professor Maturin
entered the room and peered about over his spectacles in search of a
congenial corner. Happily for me, his glance encountered mine, and his
smile accepted my invitation. I settled myself for an hour of rare
conversation.

“And what are you planning to have?” he queried. I passed him the
order I was signing, but noticed, as he read it, first surprise, then
incredulity, and finally sorrow in his expression.

“My friend, my friend,” he said, mournfully shaking his head, “and you
a literary man!”

“Won’t you, then, order for me instead?” I responded, cancelling the
slip, outwardly meek, but inwardly rejoicing that my friend’s energy
had created a situation which his kindliness would require him to
explain at length.

“In the cause of the advancement of learning, sir, I will!” he replied.
And taking a new blank, he began to write from the bottom upward,
remarking: “In the first place, I always feel, in order that a dinner
may have unity and consistency, it should be planned like a poem, from
the end toward the beginning; all the more, since there is no chance
for revision. There,” he resumed, finishing, “I think that will do, as
simple, nourishing, and suggestive.”

And he read: “Oysters, with a few Platonic olives, for the sake of
Dr. Holmes and criticism; a bit of tenderloin, in memory of Mary
Lamb’s beefsteak pudding; asparagus, which, according to Charles Lamb,
inspires gentle thoughts; cauliflower, which Dr. Johnson preferred to
all other flowers; Vergil’s salad; apple pie, according to Henry Ward
Beecher’s recipe, with a bit of Dean Swift’s cheese; and, finally, a
little coffee. I have considerably increased my usual ration in order
that you may not miss what the French call ‘the sensation of satiety.’

“I find it difficult,” sighed Professor Maturin, as he passed the
order to an attendant and leaned back in his chair, “to absolve men of
letters from what has been called the crime of unintelligent eating. Of
all men their need of and their opportunity for wisdom in such matters
is the greatest. And yet you have Gray wondering at his ailments and
his melancholia, when he was eating chiefly marmalade and pastry,
taking no exercise, and dosing himself with tar water and sage tea.

“Shelley did scarcely better in a more enlightened age. Byron’s
habitual flesh-reducing mixture, potatoes and vinegar, is chemically
indigestible. And Thoreau literally consumed himself in following and
advocating a diet which so prepared him for tuberculosis that living
half his time in the open air could not prevent it.

“The opposite extreme, which is yet more common, is even less
attractive in men of genius. Who likes to remember that Spenser and
Milton had gout, or that Goethe drank in his time fifty thousand
bottles of wine? As for Pepys, what do you think of having one’s ‘only
mayde’ dress such a home dinner as this, copied from his ‘Diary:’ ‘A
fricassee of rabbits and chickens, a leg of mutton, three carps, a
side of lamb, a dish of roasted pigeons, four lobsters, three tarts, a
lamprey pie, a dish of anchovies, and good wine of several sorts’? No
wonder that his better qualities are obscured in our memories of him.

“Philosophers, men of action, and, interestingly enough, men of the
world, have usually set a better example. ‘They that sup with Plato,’
said Aelianus, ‘are not sick or out of temper the next day.’ Socrates,
Epicurus, and Kant, all preached and practiced judgment and restraint.
Horace and Catullus insisted that their pampered guests should bring
their luxuries with them. Montaigne highly disapproved of elaborate
cooking, and Pope refused to dine with Lady Suffolk so late in the day
as four.

“Then there is that admirable story of Cincinnatus, whom the venal
senators knew they could not bribe after they found him preparing his
own dinner of turnips. It is quite in keeping that King Alfred should
have burned the cakes, and that Napoleon should have spilled the
omelet; and it is to Lady Cromwell’s credit that she would not allow
the Protector oranges that cost a groat apiece.

“Even aside from health and morals, a man’s relation to food is always
significant. Who can think of Tasso without remembering that he loved
sweetmeats? Is there not literary suggestion in the fact that Vergil
loved garlic and Horace hated it; that Horace preferred his Falernian
and his Sabine farm to the dinners and Persian apparatus of Maecenas,
but that Cicero loved to dine with Lucullus and bought himself a
seven-thousand-dollar dinner table?

“Is it not illuminating to know that the favorite food of Burns was
oat-cake, that of Byron truffles? De Quincey’s reports that Wordsworth
used the same knife for cutting butter and the pages of books; and
that Scott, when Wordsworth’s guest, repaired secretly to an inn for
chops and ale--these are not gossip, but literary criticism. It is
as surely interpretative of Dickens to know that he disliked Italian
cookery as that he was fond of playing an accordeon.

“Carlyle’s pessimism is usually attributed to indigestion. It ought, I
think, to be as usual to explain Emerson’s optimism by a digestion that
could cope successfully with his favorite pie. We habitually associate
tea and coffee with Johnson and Balzac, and their work. Should we not
as often remember that Milton produced ‘Paradise Lost’ on coffee, and
‘Paradise Regained’ on tea? Of course, such physical criticism of
literature must be limited by other judgments. I can well agree with
Dr. Gould that many writers show the effects of eye-strain, and it
is difficult to upset the diagnosis of anaemia in Hawthorne; but I
hesitate to think, with Dr. Conan Doyle, that Shakespeare had locomotor
ataxia.”

“Why did you associate oysters with criticism?” I inquired, as
Professor Maturin paused.

“Do you not recall,” he replied, “the Autocrat’s remark that literary
reputations are largely a matter of administering oysters in the
form of suppers, to gentlemen connected with criticism? Veuillot
similarly claimed that men were elected to the French Academy chiefly
because they gave good dinners. Sydney Smith applied the principle to
religion when he said, ‘The way to deal with fanatics is not to reason
with them, but to ask them to dinner.’ On the other hand, Swift used
deliberately to test men’s tempers by offering them bad wine.”

“And did Plato like olives?” I continued.

“He often made a meal of nothing else,” was the reply.

“And what was Vergil’s salad?” It arrived at that moment.

“It is made of cheese and parsley, with a bit of garlic, rue, and
coriander, salt, oil, and vinegar. A little of it is, I think, very
pleasing. I much prefer it to Sydney Smith’s. I never understood how he
could write ‘Fate cannot harm me, I have dined to-day’ about a salad
made of potatoes. For the truly esoteric doctrine you must read John
Evelyn’s ‘Discourse of Sallets.’

“Indeed, I am inclined, on the whole, to think that Sydney Smith was
what Carlyle called ‘a blethering blellum,’ when he wrote about food,
as he so often did. It was perfectly proper for him to express a desire
to experience American canvasbacks, and to be glad that he was not
born before tea; but to say that roast pheasant and bread sauce was
the source of the most elevated pleasure in life, and that his idea of
heaven was eating _pâté de fois gras_ to the sound of trumpets--that
was both posing and trifling with serious subjects. Charles Lamb’s
comments on roast pig and frogs’ legs, and his kindred table talk, are
much more genuine, and, of course, charming; but even they scarcely
touch the deeper aspects of the subject.

“Thackeray had all of Lamb’s appreciation of food and, I think,
something more. He enjoyed his own and accepted others’ idiosyncrasies
of taste,--witness his treating boys to apricot omelet, which he
hated,--but his plea for simpler and more varied dinners, for more
hospitality and less ostentation, indicates, I think, that he realized
at least something of the profound moral and social significance of
food.

“This, as you know, is one of my hobbies, and I unconsciously add it
to my other criteria of judgment in my reading. That Scott invented a
venison pasty, Dickens a sandwich, Webster a clam chowder, and Henry
Clay a stew is interesting; just as it is that Buckle was discriminate
and Heine indiscriminate in choosing tea. But it is far more
significant that Dr. Johnson considered writing a cook-book, and that
Dumas’ last work actually was such a volume of more than a thousand
pages.

“That is the kind of thing we need: sound doctrine from influential
writers, but it is not easy to get. The intemperate use of food, which
is always with us, causes many to turn with prejudice from the whole
subject. Here, as elsewhere, conservatism often opposes the good. You
know, for example, how long the clergy decried the use of forks; and
I never cease to regret that the man who was opened-minded enough to
introduce umbrellas into England should have been furiously opposed to
tea.

“Many writers, too, treat the subject fancifully, without regard to its
inherent truths--witness the conventional praise of the indigestible
turtle. Often those who intend well lack knowledge: Pythagoras made it
a principle of morality to abstain from beans, an almost perfect food;
the ideal diet of Plato’s republic, barley pudding and bread, does not
contain the elements necessary to sustain life properly. Democritus
inaugurated the still repeated heresy that any food that is pleasant
is wholesome; and even Dr. Johnson defended his doubtful practice of
eating whenever he was hungry, without regard to regularity. For all
these reasons and many others I hold it, in this enlightened age,
doubly the responsibility of intelligent men, and particularly of those
who influence popular opinion, to acquire a sound knowledge of such
matters and to do all that they can to disseminate it.”

“You have previously convinced me of this,” I replied, “but I have not
found it easy to attain to such knowledge.”

“The important thing,” continued my mentor, “is a conscious attitude
of serious attention to contemporary investigations in the field. One
should welcome every item of reliable information, observe much, and,
whenever possible, experiment. Of course, our special problem, as
persons of sedentary habit, is to obtain a large quantity of blood and
brain nutriment without taxing an organism which gets comparatively
little physical exercise. The problem is not simple, indeed it is very
complex, but it can be so completely handled by knowledge and care that
the process of solving it adds another satisfaction to life.

“Cheerfulness, by the way, is an invaluable agent in the whole
business. I know of a physician who cured a persistent dyspeptic by
requiring him to tell at least one amusing story at each meal. We are
apt to forget that the taking of food is not only a necessity, but also
one of our most constant sources of pleasure.

  _Unless some sweetness at the bottom lie,
  Who cares for all the crinkling of the pie?_

Sometimes, even, as Voltaire says, ‘the superfluous is a very necessary
thing.’

“That high thinking does not require that all our living be plain, is
admirably illustrated by this quotation from Mr. Howells’s reminiscence
of the ‘very plain’ suppers which followed the meetings of Longfellow’s
memorable Dante Club. They consisted of ‘a cold turkey, or a haunch
of venison, or some braces of grouse, or a plate of quails, with a
deep bowl of salad, and the sympathetic companionship of those elect
vintages which Longfellow loved and chose with the inspiration of
affection.’

“From such pabulum came our most poetic version of the world’s most
spiritual poet.”




VI

_Beside the Sea_


Hearing that Professor Maturin was back again in town, I made an early
call, and found him hale and hearty, bleached and bronzed, and even
more than usually clear-eyed.

“Behold me returned from a summer beside the sea,” he said in greeting.
“I see that you note the visible indications of my sea-change. Whenever
you are in the mood for a tide of talk, I believe I can convince you
that my experience was as rich as its outward signs are strange.” I
reminded him that there was never any time like the present, and added
such further solicitation that he began at once.

“You know the locality of my preference: a place frequented just enough
not to be lonely, a region of bays and sounds as well as of open sea;
where the waves batter at the cliffs only to return their spoil to the
sands--where, in short, the unity of the element appears in endless
variety. My favorite station was a dune-guarded beach of sand, which
swept on either hand into pebbles and stones, until lost in the rocks
heaped below the boulder cliffs that formed the horns of a crescent
cove.

“At first I spent unmeasured hours looking over the expanse toward the
terminal haze, and watching, as far out as I could, the great ridges
rolling with the motion of wind and tide and open sea. At the farthest,
they looked like mountain ranges, one behind the other; nearer, they
were dark green hills with grayish summits. Nearer yet, one could see
them reflect the sky, and sometimes the shore. Nearest of all, there
was a visible upgathering before the rush, plunge, and sweep on the
beach--all endlessly repeated and infinitely varied.

“The same perpetual repetition and variety appeared in the surge, as
it flooded up the sands in a wide curve of plash, ripple, and foam;
paused, retreated slowly, and then swept out, only to join with the
drag of the bottom in opposing an incoming wave, until it rose high,
plunged forward, and broke into the churning shallows, which were
quickly covered by the main body of the wave as it flooded in.

“The outermost margin of almost every surge lingered long enough to
make its record in a tiny ridge of sand and to reflect the light and
color of the sky; then it sank into the sand, leaving a burden of
pebbles and shells, stubble and seaweed, and the like. This flotsam
and jetsam is so constantly swept up, drawn back, and tossed to and
fro that I was not surprised to find the sands, under a microscope,
composed entirely of such materials worn to powder. Behind me, the
sea and the wind had heaped the sand into hills, that shore grasses
burrowed into and held together. To left and right, the cliffs,
although high and precipitous, were so scarred and worn by storm and
wave that they looked almost primeval. Their tops were bared by the
winds and corroded by the alternate action of heat and moisture; their
granite sides were seamed and stained by the surge; and their feet
were encumbered with fragments of their own wreckage that must have
thundered down like avalanches. These rocks, whether flung forward in
reefs like sculptured waves, or heaped like ruins, were naturally of a
rich old rose, but they were often also gray with barnacles, or green
with sea growths, and they showed even deeper in tone when submerged
beneath the many pools that similarly mellowed and enriched the
coloring of pebbles, shells, and weeds.

“My observation of the almost infinitely varied flora and fauna of the
sea was, naturally, but superficial. Yet I saw many delightful plant
and flower-like forms of dark or light green, yellow, brown, and red,
all ceaselessly retinted by the ever-changing sky lights, and the
reflection and refraction of the water. Sometimes they rioted in thick
tangles among the rocks; again they softly swayed, outspread toward the
rising and falling surface.

“The fauna I preferred to look at under water, for, on the whole, I
found them grotesque, although I was bound to admire their adjustment
to their environment, and to respect them as possible images of our
remote ancestors. I was especially impressed with the constant warfare
beneath the surface, as exemplified in the regular manœuvring of whole
armies of tiny fish, only to have company after company routed by the
dash and gulp of some larger enemy.

“The bottom of the sea I have never seen, save through the
glass-bottomed boats of the Bermudas, but some day I hope for a diver’s
view of the depths. It is easy to understand why the imagination of the
poets should be stimulated by the idea of that cool, dim quietness,
disturbed only by the swaying of verdure and the movement of great
fish; of the richness of color, and the long, slow passage of time,
measured only by the up-building of the coral.

“The open sea is, of course, familiar to us all, and yet its apparent
boundlessness and immeasurable depth are ever new as the most immense
thing in our knowledge--the sky belonging rather to the realm of the
intangible. Mid-ocean always makes me feel the infinite continuity
of time, the omnipresence of natural law, and a stimulus to greater
harmony with its workings. Nowhere else are my ‘cosmic emotions’ so
stirred. One gets something of the same impression on land wherever
one can mark the ceaseless rising, pausing, and falling of the tide,
under the mysterious governance of the moon. I am more than fond
of the regular, gentle quality of the tide’s behavior, even if it
does sometimes seem stealthy in its creeping toward and around the
half-oblivious observer.

“I cannot similarly commend the behavior of the wind, when it opposes
the tide in bluster on the sea or pushes it in tumult on the shore.
The tide is a serene and responsible world power; the wind almost
always performs its indispensable functions with all the eccentricity
of genius. A breeze is positively attractive when ruffling the surface
or sweeping spray from the wave-crests, and the wind itself is
unobjectionable when it consistently urges the waves in one direction.
But when it plays havoc with the clouds, or ‘ruffians on the enchafèd
flood’ until it fastens upon the eluctant sea a behavior as bad and a
reputation worse than its own--then I am by no means for it.

“It was my fortune this summer to witness several storms of such
intensity that I became impressed with the routine of their procedure.
The sea--grown dark, heavy, and oily--is first flicked and spotted, and
then strangely lighted, all over, with the dash of rain and hail; the
sun is made lurid, then shrouded, and then hidden by a metallic sky;
the clouds grow gloomy and sullen until they are shattered by peals of
thunder and riven by livid lightnings. Then the wind rushes, howls,
and roars; tearing and hurtling the clouds and tumbling and lashing
the waves until they leap and plunge, reel and writhe, flinging up
hissing foam and whirling spray ‘shrewd with salt.’ It is undoubtedly
glorious--but I like it best when it is over, leaving the torn waves
heavy with foam as a reminder, by contrast, of the quieter beauties of
a calmer sea.

“Even the sky, the most beautiful thing that we know, seems to multiply
its beauty by the sea. One day I saw night gradually lapsing into dawn.
The sea glimmered as though the stars had come down, and then flashed
until, in the language of Swinburne, it blossomed rosily and flowered
in the sun, floating all fiery upon the burning water. I saw many long
mornings of sapphire sky and lapis-lazuli sea, and many noons when
the waves glittered until their spray became diamonds. Through long
afternoons the sea reflected sky and clouds in every shade of silver,
blue, and green. The amber fire of the setting sun not only made the
heavens splendid, but poured both direct and reflected rays upon the
sea until nothing but the idea of a stupendous opal could suggest its
coloring. Later, all would fade until land was lost, the sea grew deep
and dark, and the only light was the foam and the reflections of the
stars. With the moon, all grew new again. Rising low and large, it
threw a broad, undulating pathway as golden as that of the sun was
silver. Where it reached the shore its glitter extended along the
surf, gleaming over the sands, and twinkling wherever spray or dew had
fallen. Later yet, as the moon quietly sank, the general illumination
grew dim, until obscurity covered land and sea alike, and the sea
seemed to merge into infinite space.

“Then, as at no other time, one hears the sound of the sea. I spent
many hours listening, endeavoring to analyze it, and to interpret its
effect. Its continuity and variety are perhaps its most striking
characteristics. It is so ceaseless that it suggests the everlasting.
Within this perpetuity it rises and sinks, leaps and falls, gathers
and dissolves; it sweeps and rolls, sways and trembles; it seems to
approach and withdraw, to flow and overflow; it sounds and resounds,
repeats and changes. And well it may do all this and more, considering
that its source is a countless number and variety of waves, surging,
breaking, and seething among themselves; rushing, plashing, lapping on
the shore, chafing sand, rattling pebbles, grating shells, grinding
rocks:--all of the resulting sound being constantly varied as well
as augmented by breeze, wind, and storm; by the configuration and
reverberating qualities of the shore; and by the varying acoustic
properties of the atmosphere.

“Analysis being thus nearly baffled, I turned to analogy, and found
the sound like the rumble of thunder, the crash of falling rocks, the
rush of cataracts; like the quiver of green branches and the rustle of
dry leaves; like the bellow and roar of animals; the clash of arms and
armor. It is very much like music in its elements of monotone, chord,
cadence, melody, and harmony; its relations of continuity, rhythm,
repetition, and variation; in its sounds as of cymbal, tympani, bell,
trumpet, viol, harp, or organ; its suggestions of symphony or chorale.
It is, perhaps, most of all like the human voice, half audible in
whisper or murmur; inarticulate in sigh or sob; muffled in mutter
or moan; hushed in lullaby or croon; blended in a unison of song or
supplication; confused in the hum and rumor, the call and shout, the
clamor or tumult of great crowds.

“From such prosing of my own I turned to the record and interpretation
of sea music by the poets. From them I collected an alphabetical list
of characterizations, and by the time that I had accumulated about
one hundred I fell so into their spirit that I, myself, produced the
following--as yet unnamed--poetic fragment:

  _Always attunéd, its anthem billowing, breaking is blown;
  Ceaseless, its cadenced complaining deepens to dirge or to drone;
  Ever its eloquent echo falling, again flies free,
  Till it gathers and grows in grandeur like heaven’s high harmony._

“I stopped there, because ‘kissing’ was the next striking epithet
and that seemed rather too fanciful, although the Swinburnian spirit
aroused by the composition yearned, so to speak, to go on to ‘mightily
murmured the main’ and ‘sonorously sounded the sibilant sea.’

“Seriously, however, the problem of adequately recording and
interpreting the aspects of the sea is as fascinating as it is
difficult. The best media are, of course, sculpture for its form and
substance, painting for its light and color, music for its movement
and sound. Poetry and prose reflect something of all of these, poetry
more suggestively, prose more accurately. The poets, however, turn
so quickly from actual aspects and impressions to their mental and
emotional accompaniments, that they seem devoted rather to exploiting
their own poetic gifts than the richness of their subject. Their
observation is usually sensitive and keen, but it is quickly checked
and often distorted by the action of fancy. Accuracy of expression
is frequently disturbed by spontaneous or deliberate search for the
picturesque or figurative utterance, made so easy by the enormous
vocabulary that the sea has impressed upon our language. Poets who are
gifted with rhythmical or harmonic power habitually exceed in those
directions also. Happily there are some sea poems that are true as well
as beautiful, but it seems quite too bad that such masters as Shelley,
Arnold, and Emerson should intellectualize, and Coleridge, Rossetti,
and Poe should dream, about the sea until they make it appear merely
a minister to their moods rather than the immense, unspoiled, cosmic
thing it really is.”

“Man overboard?” said Professor Maturin suddenly, as he halted abruptly
before me in the perambulation he had begun after rising to secure the
manuscript of his poetic fragment, and had slowly continued ever since
back and forth along the long rug that he calls his “beat”--“I have
flowed in good earnest. Your submerged appearance indicates that you
agree with me that my experience was well-nigh overwhelming.”

Accepting his helping hand, I pulled myself out of the depths of the
huge leather chair into which I had sunk, and expressed my genuine
appreciation by saying, along with my good-nights, “The next time we
meet, I should like just such another dip.”




VII

_Christmas_


It is always possible to divine something of the state of Professor
Maturin’s mind from the order or the congestion of his books and
papers. When, therefore, the other day, I found him behind a perfect
rampart of volumes bristling with paper-markers, I knew that he was
loading with some new knowledge or other, and meditated how I might
draw his fire. But he anticipated my efforts by sallying from his
fortification, dishevelled but beaming, with the salvo:

  “_God rest you, merry gentleman;
  Let nothing you dismay!--_

“What will you give for the Christmas spirit?” he continued. “I have
been seeking it, seasonably, and believe that I have found it.”

I capitulated immediately, and we sat down by the fire for a parley,
which he began promptly.

“The Christmas spirit appears to be inherent in human nature, in
the climatic change from summer seed-time, through autumn harvest,
to hearty winter relaxation and cheer over the garnered fruits of
husbandry or art. In the South it began as the winter feast of Saturn,
celebrated with masking and gifts. In the North it was Odin’s, with
log fires and feasting. Then the early Christian fathers chose it for
celebrating their Founder’s new teaching of peace and good-will.

“Gradually all of this blended into the most interesting mingling of
the material and the spiritual that we have in all our manners and
customs. The traditions of the shepherds and the star, the nativity,
and the wise men of the East became the centre of the celebration.
But the mediaeval popularity of Macrobius’s book on the Saturnalia
perpetuated its carnival and games, its candles and garlands, and its
giving of gifts, especially to children. The descending Teutons brought
their wassail and their tree ceremonials. Germany added Saint Nicholas,
Santa Claus, and the filling of stockings. France seems to have
furnished the carols. England elaborated the season’s food and drink,
and America contributed the turkey.

“With the growth of church and state the day became one of pomp and
circumstance. Westminster Abbey was consecrated on Christmas in 1065,
and William was crowned there the next Christmas. Other episcopal and
royal functions followed, until more was spent on this season than in
all the year beside. There were special buildings, elaborate pageants
elaborately set, and feasts of five hundred dishes with sixty oxen for
one course and eight-hundred-pound plum puddings. There were jousts at
which three hundred spears were broken, and the presentation of as many
as thirty plays. Earlier, the plays were religious; later, Shakespeare
provided the court play for Christmas, 1601, and Ben Jonson for 1616.
Milton’s ‘Comus’ was presented at Ludlow Castle during the Christmas
season of 1634.

“The universities and the inns of court were likewise keen for plays
and for ‘the boar’s head served with minstrelsy.’ The aristocracy
and gentry kept open house, for sometimes as many as three hundred
persons. Sir Roger de Coverley sent a string of puddings and a pack
of cards to every poor family in the parish; and rich decedents left
Christmas dinners and gifts to the poor. The peasantry entered heartily
into seasonable mummery and games, dances and songs, so industriously
thumbing the many early printed books of carols that almost none of
them remain.

“Everywhere indoor leisure and the seasonable mood gave rise to all
sorts and conditions of legendary lore--of spirits, of trees that
flower and animals that speak on Christmas eve, and of weather wisdom,
like:

  _If Christmasse day on fryday be,
  The frost of wynter harde shal be._

“From the beginning, the spirit of the celebration had to wage war
with the flesh. The fathers of the church never ceased to remonstrate
that festivity endangered the solemnity of the season. There were
constant failures to remember the peaceful character of the feast.
The Danes fell on King Alfred while he was celebrating Christmas in
878, and William the Conqueror got into York on Christmas in 1069 by
sending in spies with good-will gifts of food. The mediaeval Lords of
Misrule, originally established to control festivity, became themselves
uncontrolled, and had to be abolished.”

“Even though they made some very good laws,” I interrupted, “against
eating two dinners in one day, and kissing without leave.”

“The Pilgrim fathers at Plymouth frowned on current excesses by working
on Christmas day in 1620 and by later prohibiting its celebration.
Cromwell’s Parliament sat every Christmas day from 1644 to 1656, and
sermonized and legislated against the celebration as a carnal feast,
ordering churches shut, shops open, and decorations down. But this was
too extreme, and the people smashed the shop windows and put up more
evergreens than the Lord Mayor’s men could burn; and Evelyn delighted
in being arrested for going to church on Christmas in 1657. In five
years all was so changed that Pepys could for once combine preaching
and practice, by hearing a Christmas sermon on joyousness and having
plum pudding and mince pie for dinner.

“From the beginning, too, the spirit of benevolence has had its
difficulties. Watchmen left verses at doors, wanderers sang carols, and
children chanted, ‘I’ve got a little pocket to put a penny in,’ until
such suggestion to benevolence became a little too definite, and it
was legislated against. In 1668 Pepys says tipping ‘cost me much money
this Christmas already, and will do more.’ Half a century later Swift
writes: ‘By the Lord Harry, I shall be done with Christmas boxes. The
rogues at the coffee house have raised their tax, every one giving a
crown, and I gave mine for shame; besides a great many half-crowns, to
great men’s porters, etc.’

“Of other giving Swift writes: ‘Making agreeable presents ... [is] an
affair as delicate as most in the course of life,’ and he never fails
to caution Stella against a new danger, that of losing her money in
Christmas gaming. Concerning this custom Walpole wrote on twelfth-day
in 1752: ‘His Majesty, according to annual custom, offered myrrh,
frankincense, and a small bit of gold; and, at night, in commemoration
of the three kings or wise men, the King and royal family played at
hazard ... his most sacred Majesty won three guineas, and his R. H. the
duke, three thousand four hundred pounds.’

“Concerning gifts, Walpole instances the charming presents devised for
a little girl of ten by the Duchess of Suffolk and Lord Chetwynd, aged
seventy-six and eighty, respectively; and he prescribes the theory,
‘Pray remember not to ruin yourself in presents. A very slight gift of
a guinea or two obliges as much, is more fashionable, and not a moment
sooner forgotten than a magnificent one; and then you may cheaply
oblige the more persons.’”

“Such being the earlier history and tradition of the festival, what
should be its modern spirit?” I inquired.

“For that, too,” continued Professor Maturin, “there is no lack of
leading. Charles Lamb is frankly for ‘the good old munching system
... _ingens gloria apple-pasty-orum_,’ and does not hesitate to
prescribe for Christmas, 1800, ‘snipes exactly at nine, punch at ten,
with argument; difference of opinion expected about eleven, perfect
unanimity, with some haziness and dimness, before twelve.’

“Thomas Love Peacock makes his Rev. Dr. Opimian say, about 1860: ‘I
think much of Christmas and all its associations. I like the idea of
the yule-log. I like the festoons of holly on the walls and windows;
the dance under the mistletoe; the gigantic sausage; the baron of beef;
the vast globe of plum pudding; the tapping of the old October; the
inexhaustible bowl of punch.... I like the idea of what has gone, and I
can still enjoy the reality of what remains.’

“Dr. Opimian further prescribes for the season such merry tales as his
contemporary ‘Ingoldsby Legends’ provide in the distinguished career,
but inglorious end, of ‘The Spectre of Tappington,’ which nightly made
away with the trousers of the guest who occupied the haunted room at
Christmas. All of these same hearty traditions are perpetuated by
Fenimore Cooper in his description of Christmas festivity in ‘The
Pioneers.’”

“Does not Washington Irving,” I asked, “have an important place in the
tradition?”

“Precisely so,” continued Professor Maturin; “it was reserved for
him, from his knowledge of Dutch and English customs, to make a new
selection and recombination of Christmas ideals so appealing as to
have set the standard ever since. His half-dozen Christmas papers
dwell, with his characteristic love of the past, on the superior
honesty, kindliness, and joy of the old holiday customs. No refinement
of elegance can replace, he maintains, the family gatherings, the
perfecting of sympathies, the realization of mutual dependence, and
the increase of mutual affection, instinct in the ancient hospitality.
To his own question as to the worth of Christmas observances, he gives
the most characteristic answer in his philosophy--there is plenty of
wisdom in the world, but we need more sound pleasure to beguile care
and increase benevolence and good humor.

“It was this ethical intention to reëstablish the old tradition of
kindliness that Dickens followed, with the result of again endearing
the season, as Mr. Howells has said, ‘to the whole English-speaking
world, with a wider and deeper hold than it had ever had before ... the
chief agency in universalizing the great Christmas holiday as we now
have it.’

“There is no need to remind any one how the whole baker’s dozen of
Dickens’s ‘Christmas Stories’ delightfully champion hard work and good
cheer, sympathy and benevolence, affection and self-sacrifice, and even
the softening effects of suffering and sorrow--sometimes by directly
illustrating these blessings, again by picturing the misery of their
opposites. His satires at pretended benevolence and commercial greed,
and his championship of the common man, answer in advance all later
criticisms concerning the burden and the cost of Christmas and current
complaints over popular ingratitude.

“‘I have great faith in the poor,’ Dickens once wrote. ‘To the best of
my ability I always endeavour to present them in a favourable light to
the rich; and I shall never cease, I hope, until I die, to advocate
their being made as happy and as wise as the circumstances of their
condition, in its utmost improvement, will admit.’

“Thackeray called Dickens’s ‘Christmas Stories’ a national benefit, and
to any man or woman who reads them a personal kindness; and Thackeray,
too, served the season with Christmas pieces of sympathy, humor, and
pantomime, and with his famous onslaught on pretentious misanthropy.
You recall how the _Times_ slated one of his Christmas stories as
worthless on the very day that the publishers asked for a second
edition; and how Thackeray, in the preface to the second edition,--‘An
Essay on Thunder and Small Beer,’--made such delightful fun of the
review’s futility, its absurd superciliousness, its inflated language,
and its false figures of speech, that snarling criticism learned at
least a temporary lesson.

“Thackeray waged his war differently from Dickens, but, on the whole, I
have found nothing more compactly adequate on the Christmas spirit than
Thackeray’s

  _I wish you health, and love, and mirth,
  As fits the solemn Christmas-tide,_

unless it be the conclusion to old Nicholas Breton’s ‘Fantasticks,’
written in 1626: ‘In brief I thus conclude it: I hold it a memory of
Heaven’s love and the world’s peace, the mirth of the honest and the
meeting of the friendly. Farewell.’”




VIII

_The Sovran Herb_


“You are come most opportunely,” said Professor Maturin, as I was shown
into his study. “Just in time for coffee and a cigar and some good
talk with my friend the Vicar of All Souls.” And he presented me to a
gentleman whose clerical dress graced a more than ordinarily handsome
figure. His chair and Professor Maturin’s being on opposite sides of
the fireplace, I drew mine between them, and noted, during the pouring
of the coffee, the fine seriousness and serenity of the clergyman’s
face. He made no remark, however, until he said, “None, I thank you,”
slightly raising his hand when I proffered the cigars that Professor
Maturin had passed. But, after I had made my selection and had returned
the box to Professor Maturin, the Vicar reconsidered and joined us.

“Smoking rests me greatly when I am tired,” he continued, after we
had lighted, “but I am thinking of giving it up. I am moved to do so
by such statements as this from my afternoon paper”--and extracting
a clipping from his pocket and adjusting his eye-glasses, he read:
“Medical opinion and statistics unite to prove that smoking irritates
the respiratory system, decreases lung capacity, prevents the
purification of the blood, depresses the nerve centres, checks heart
action, impairs digestion, retards growth, reduces weight, strength,
and endurance; restricts the therapeutic effects of medicines, delays
the healing of wounds, and impairs, if it does not destroy, mental
life--all of which effects, inevitable although perhaps hidden
for years, would make tobacco one of the gravest dangers of the
century even if it did not harm the eyes, excite thirst, and induce
intemperance.”

“If we believed that,” said Professor Maturin, getting out of his
chair, “we should not only abandon tobacco instantly, but organize a
crusade for its total prohibition. But my medical friends inform me
that the statistics are still quite too scanty to generalize from, and
that there have been no scientific experiments, except a few which have
apparently proved that smoking aids digestion.

“As for personal opinion, it has long been equally violent on
both sides of the question. Here,” he continued, opening a volume
of pamphlets which he had drawn from one of his bookcases, “is a
three-century-old illustration,” and he read: “There cannot be a more
base, and yet hurtful corruption in a country than this barbarous and
beastly habit borrowed from wild Indians, a habit unnatural, urgent,
expensive, unclean--loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful
to the brain, dangerous to the lungs--and in the black, stinking fume
thereof nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke of the pit that
is bottomless.”

“That,” resumed Professor Maturin, “is the personal opinion of James
the First of England in the ‘Counterblaste to Tobacco,’ which he
followed up by imposing a duty of six shillings eightpence a pound in
addition to the modest tuppence previously demanded.

“But here also is a counterblast to King James’s, by one of the most
learned physicians of his time, William Barclay. He proclaims tobacco
to be a heavenly panacea of wondrous curative power, the fuel of life
divinely sent to a cold, phlegmatic land. He characterizes all other
opinions as ‘raving lies, forged by scurvy, lewd, unlearned leeches.’”
As Professor Maturin put the book up and returned to his chair he
concluded: “I cannot feel that personal opinion on the subject to-day
has any sounder basis.”

“Possibly not,” replied the Vicar, after a short pause,--“possibly not.
But can we not conclude something from the standing of the witnesses?
Is there not some significance in the cordial affiliation between the
weed and alcohol? How shall we answer Horace Greeley’s offer to give
two white blackbirds for one blackguard who did not use tobacco?”

“The collocation of Bacchus and tobacco is, of course, historic,”
responded Professor Maturin, “but, on the other hand, as a substitute
for alcohol, tobacco is certainly on the side of temperance. If,
moreover, it is to be judged by the company it has kept, we must reckon
with the practical advocacy of many good men and true from Milton to
Emerson, as well as of all the smoking roysterers from Ben Jonson to
Burns.”

“I must admit that I can recall only Sir Isaac Newton and Horace
Walpole, Dr. Holmes and Mr. Swinburne, in specific opposition,” said
the Vicar, “although I venture to think that the Greeks would have
opposed it.”

“And the Romans have approved it,” rejoined Professor Maturin. “There
is an immense mass of literature on both sides. I agree neither
with King James nor with his counterblasters. But I do believe with
Cowper that smoking quickens thought, with Lowell that it mellows
conversation, with Dr. Johnson that it induces tranquillity, and with
Molière that it prompts benevolence.”

“But Dr. Holmes held that it muddled thought,” retorted the Vicar,
“and it certainly silenced two eloquent talkers on that occasion when
Carlyle and Emerson smoked together a whole evening with never a word.
I fear that only too often it relaxes divine discontent into ill-timed
resignation, turns thought to reverie, and lulls the stir of action
into dreams.”

“That, surely, is the defect of its quality,” admitted Professor
Maturin; “yet it did not cloud Kant’s thought, dim Milton’s poetic
vision, or relax the will of Frederick the Great or of Bismarck.
It may, perhaps, have somewhat clouded Lowell, dimmed Thackeray,
and relaxed Lamb. But who can tell? We cannot determine the ideal
combination of the strenuous and the contemplative life until we solve
the personal equation.”

“Very true, very true,” acknowledged the Vicar; “therefore, let us
begin again. Is not smoking an essentially selfish, or at least an
anti-social, habit?”

“It does, I believe,” responded Professor Maturin, “incline one to
prefer the company of other smokers, and to reduce the number even of
those that one desires at a time. However, if that be the case, we
must commend it for inciting such conversation as the present, such
intimate games as chess, and such profitable solitude as that with
books. It was no accidental combination that made Buckle say he never
regretted the money spent for books or tobacco. King Alfred and his
ancient candle are succeeded by the modern scholar, measuring time by
the rings on the ash of his cigar, or by the succession of his pipes.
Is not tobacco, therefore, an encourager of domesticity? What makes one
more content to stay at home?”

“Or away from home?” smiled the clergyman, consulting his watch. “As
for domesticity, you know the saying that ‘tobacco is woman’s only
successful rival;’ and you recall those shocking lines of Kipling’s. I
think I never knew a woman who was not, secretly, at least, distressed
by the odor of tobacco--no matter what the younger ones may say to the
contrary. Remember poor Mrs. Carlyle!”

“There were two Mrs. Carlyles,” chuckled Professor Maturin, “and
you must restrict your sympathies to Jane, for the dowager and son
Thomas used to smoke their pipes together. Of the feminine reaction
to tobacco, however, I am no judge, although I do recall George
Sand’s pipe, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu’s snuff, and the cigarettes of
contemporary empresses and suffragettes. Have I not heard that women
physicians prescribe the latter--cigarettes, I mean--for feminine
nervousness?”

“I have no doubt whatever about cigarettes,” replied the Vicar. “I
would unhesitatingly banish them as the bane of the young and the
foolish. Snuff, also, we are done with, and happily, for it was the
most slovenly form of an indulgence which is unclean at its best.” Here
the Vicar flicked some imaginary ashes from his waistcoat. “We can
never be too grateful that our contemporary Sir Joshua Reynoldses are
not snuffy. But I must confess that a good Havana now and then”--and
the Vicar spoke slower and slower, until his sentence became an
eloquent silence as he drew upon his cigar, expelled the smoke, and
watched it fade away.

No one spoke for some moments, and as neither the Vicar nor Professor
Maturin seemed inclined to do so, I ventured a brief panegyric upon
pipes, preferably briars--their intimate, companionable, cumulative
qualities; the preference for them on the part of Spenser and Tennyson,
Locke and Fielding, Lamb and Lowell; and the varied range of their
offering as illustrated by Cowper’s Virginia, Thackeray’s Canaster,
and Aldrich’s Latakia.

“Nor may we forget Southey’s ‘Elegy on a Quid,’” added Professor
Maturin. “Seriously, however,” he continued, “smoke is beautiful
to the eye, pleasing in flavor and odor, smooth to the tactile and
comforting to the temperature sense, the occasion of a tranquil
muscular rhythm--the last not the least important. Thus it gratifies
six senses at once--no wonder its use has become universal, intimately
incorporated into national life east and west, south and north.”

“Alas, too intimately,” sighed the Vicar. “It costs half a billion a
year. It is another artificial habit that the world finds it difficult
if not impossible to do without. So few have Newton’s fear of adding to
the number of their necessities. Think how Thackeray missed his cigar
and how Prescott, when but one a day was allowed to him, ranged Paris
over for the very largest procurable! Did not Stevenson write, ‘Most
men eat occasionally, but what they really live on is tobacco’? Did
not Charles Lamb say he toiled after tobacco as other men toiled after
virtue? Was not his struggle to stop smoking as severe as De Quincey’s
with Opium?”

“I suspect,” replied Professor Maturin, “that both Lamb and De Quincey
made the literary most of their sufferings, and as for force of habit,
who can tell? I am sure that I never smoke merely from habit, but
always because of a conscious desire for the kind of satisfaction that
smoking gives.”

“Yes, yes,” sighed the Vicar, finishing his cigar, “but I am truly
distressed about the matter. I wish that your scientists would make a
comprehensive and conclusive investigation into the effects of tobacco,
as they have recently done into those of alcohol. Is it a stimulant
or a sedative? What is its effect on perception, comprehension,
association, combination, on general efficiency, on general health? Is
it a poison or a panacea?”

“It is certainly time that we knew surely,” replied Professor Maturin
gravely, “and it is our obligation to urge our scientific friends to
inform us. Until then, however, I must confess that my own experience
chiefly corroborates Carlyle’s judgment that ‘sedative, gently
clarifying tobacco smoke, with the obligation to a minimum of speech,
surely gives human intellect and insight the best chance they can
have.’ The general situation is well summed up by old Burton, when he
says: ‘Tobacco, divine, rare, superexcellent tobacco, which goes far
beyond all the panaceas, potable gold, and philosopher’s stones, ...
but as it is commonly abused by most men, which take it as tinkers
do ale, ’tis a plague, a mischief, a violent purger of goods, lands,
health, hellish, devilish and damned tobacco.’ Have another cigar,
dominie.”

“Until we really know about tobacco,” concluded the Vicar, firmly
closing the box, “we, at least, will practice moderation.”




IX

_Men’s Faces_


“Come in, come in,” said Professor Maturin, as I was shown to the
door of his study. “I am very well, indeed, thank you--‘pursuing the
even terror of my way,’ as the proofreader said. I have just been
trying,” he continued, taking some papers from his writing-table,
“to triangulate Shakespeare’s nose according to Sir Francis Galton’s
plan for classifying profiles. But it appears that the shape of
Shakespeare’s nose is as uncertain as the spelling of his name. Here
in the Ely House portrait it is long and rounded, in the Droeshout
it is rather flattened, in the Zoust quite irregular, in the Trinity
Church monument a very vile nose indeed. You may observe, moreover,
among these plates, a similar disagreement concerning every one of
his features, although the general expression is like enough. All of
which was renewing in my mind, as you came in, certain observations
concerning men’s faces.

“If you were to go over with me my collection of literary portraits
here,--I have about two thousand,--you would note immense differences
in line and mass, light and shade, depth and delicacy. The prints
are from all sorts and conditions of statues, paintings, engravings,
and photographs; taken at all sorts of angles from profile to full
face, and at various elevations. The actual color and texture of the
originals, to say nothing of the artists’ ideas of them, would make the
variation much greater. And yet I believe you will agree that, in spite
of all detractions, almost every plate gives a surprisingly expressive
and individual characterization.”

Professor Maturin waited in silence while I looked over enough of
the portraits to convince myself of the justice of his observation.
Then he continued: “While possessed of that idea I amused myself by
picking out doubles. Here are some surprising similarities in the
faces of most dissimilar persons--Tolstoy and Verlaine, Bishop Heber
and Byron, Ronsard and Lincoln. All of these portraits of Spenser make
him look like Mephistopheles, and Seneca here is the exact counterpart
of our friend the sporting editor. In general, however, a resemblance
in appearance--like that, for example, between Shakespeare and
Calderon--represents a considerable correspondence in nature. Sometimes
this may be attributed to identity of race and nationality, as in the
cases of Renan and Sainte-Beuve, Taine and Zola. But most often the
resemblance shows true to temperament and character in spite of race,
time, and circumstance. Notice, for example, these prints of Horace and
Herrick, Bürger and Burns, Heine and Chopin, Maurice Jokai and George
W. Cable. Such resemblances hold even between very unusual faces, such
as those of Uhland and Goldsmith, and there are sometimes triplets like
Fouqué, Hoffmann and Poe. It appears, decidedly, that appearances are
_not_ deceptive.

“Personality cannot, of course, entirely transcend all rules: Dumas
père shows unequivocally his negroid blood; you can generalize
concerning the bent Russian head, the arched Spanish brows, the full
German nose, the common irregularity of English features. Accident
broke Thackeray’s nose, cost Camoens an eye, and at least threatened
De Foe’s ears. Distress left its mark on Cervantes and on Poe. Lamb
said, you remember, that Coleridge looked like an archangel, a little
damaged. Pope and De Quincey show their imperfect health. The posture
and the pose of occupation leave traces, like the knitted brows of
philosophers and men of action, the narrowed eyes of historians and
explorers, the open nostril of the naturalist, the worn mouth of the
orator. But these are minor matters--the general expression remains.

“The character of this general expression is perhaps most determined
by the size and shape of the head. These vary enormously--as one may
see in the Hutton collection of masks at Princeton--all the way from
the greatness of Thackeray’s to the smallness of Byron’s, from the
shortness and breadth of Luther’s to the narrowness and length of Lope
de Vega’s, from Darwin’s deep sloping dome to Scott’s ‘Peveril of the
Peak.’

“A single feature frequently dominates, like Sir Philip Sidney’s
‘imperial head with fair, large front,’ or Jean Paul Richter’s
strangely bulging forehead. The eye is often the most striking feature.
Scott said, literally, that the eyes of Burns glowed; the same thing
was said about Keats and Hawthorne. Scientists are notable for eager
eyes, mystics for dreamy ones. I have noticed that stylists, like
Flaubert, Catulle Mendès, d’Annunzio, John La Farge, and Charles
Eliot Norton, are heavy-lidded. Large noses connote power, if we may
judge from the Hebrews, the Greeks, and the Romans; from Dante and
Savonarola, Wordsworth and Newman. We have the testimony of Lowell
that Emerson’s nose was so large that it cast a shadow. Socrates and
Plato, Herbert Spencer and Dr. Holmes, however, were but illy favored
in this respect. Satirists’ noses are long, and, as we might expect,
often pointed,--witness Erasmus, Swift, and Voltaire.

“Mouths are only less expressive than eyes. Sterne’s mouth shows him a
satyr, De Quincey’s marks him an imp. In general the mouths of authors,
and of clergymen, too often show self-importance or complacency. Julius
Caesar’s square jaw and Bismarck’s thick neck are also full of meaning,
although such features and the always significant poise of the head are
often obscured by the countless forms of ruff, band, stock, or collar
that men have affected from time to time.

“The hair and beard are even greater transformers. Personally, I like
somewhat wayward hair such as Scott’s, Hazlitt’s, and Tennyson’s. All
red-haired writers from Ben Jonson to Bulwer-Lytton attract me, while
I am repelled by Byron’s glossy and Shelley’s silky hair. Many heads
are improved by the thinning of their thatch, although Emerson’s was
not; some, like Irving’s, are enhanced by a wig. But in general wigs
are great levellers,--imagine Dr. Johnson in Addison’s! Alexander
Hamilton’s queue makes a fine balance for his profile, and a tonsure
is not always unbecoming. One may say the same for beards: Fitzgerald
always objected to Tennyson’s, but Bryant and Longfellow and Ruskin
were all bettered by theirs, the last immensely so. Freeman, however,
rather overdid it, and Flaubert’s walrus moustache was a monstrous
thing in such a stylist. Baudelaire’s beard and Swinburne’s are to me
much more shocking than anything in their verses. But the doctrine
of beards is really very subtle. Mr. Henry James’s removal of his
apparently reacted upon his style.

“After conspicuous single features, arrangement most influences
expression, and it is surprising to note how irregular this is.
Such correlation and symmetry as that of George Meredith is quite
exceptional. There are disagreements in color even between eyes--one
of Lamb’s was hazel, the other gray. The eyes and brows of Chatterton,
Balzac, and Douglas Jerrold are on a different plane, back of the rest
of their features. The right side of Thoreau’s face and of Whitman’s
is lower than the other, while the left side of Poe’s face is smaller.
Disproportion in mass is most frequent, the lower half of the face
being often too large for the remainder. Alexander von Humboldt and
Matthew Arnold are the only examples I have noted of disproportionally
large brows and eyes. The chins of Hegel, Gray, and Pater, on the other
hand, are at least one size too large; the nose and mouth of Tyndall
and Emerson are certainly two sizes too large; Hans Christian Andersen
displays an even greater lack of harmony. Dr. Johnson combined a fine
head and eyes with a coarse nose and mouth; Landor’s mouth was as
weak as his head was powerful. Goldsmith presented the extraordinary
combination of a low, bulging forehead, with almost no head behind
the ears, handsome eyes and nose, a swollen upper lip, and a receding
chin--all much pitted with smallpox. Goldsmith is a striking example,
for in spite of his singularly unfortunate appearance, his intrinsic
charm is yet obvious.

“Thus, while the details of men’s faces are a source of curious
interest, their greatest significance is the way in which a general
expression transpires through them. We are not in the least repelled
by the ugliness of Aesop and Socrates, the ‘dumb-ox’ look of Thomas
Aquinas, or what Edward Lear called ‘Wordsworth’s desire for milk
appearance.’ When Petrarch appears cheerful and Montaigne sad, Smollett
mournful and Spinoza merry, we yet feel that there is more than meets
the eye. I believe, Tennyson to the contrary notwithstanding, that
a man’s character is usually clear in his countenance; here I take
up at random Confucius and Calvin, Cicero and Franklin, Rabelais and
Chaucer--who could misjudge them? It is as Hazlitt said--you get from
a great number of details a general impression which is true and well
founded, although you may not be able to analyze or explain it.”

“It is certainly most interesting,” I said, as Professor Maturin put
his portraits into their cabinet. “I wonder why the subject has not
been investigated more fully and scientifically.”

“It has been thought about a good deal,” replied Professor Maturin,
“ever since the Greeks. Renaissance rulers thought it of use in
selecting their courtiers. Goethe kept a painter busy recording faces
that interested him. About a century ago Lavater devoted a score of
handsome folios, with splendid plates, to the study of faces, but
his treatment was very desultory--discussions of ‘deep, designing,
envious villains as represented by Raphael,’ and so on. Some of his
successors went to the opposite extreme of definiteness, concluding
that long noses denote courage, high cheek-bones honesty, large lips
sociability, and the like. There have been, however, various scientific
studies, such as Darwin’s on the expression of the emotions, Galton’s
composite photography, and Bertillon’s accurate system of measurement
and classification. Yet for some reason the subject still remains one
of those that bibliographers catalogue as merely ‘curious.’ I like to
dip into it now and then because of its general human interest, and
always find it a stimulus to freshness and directness of observation; a
caution, as Sir Joshua Reynolds said, against distrusting imagination
and feeling in favor of ‘narrow, partial, confined, argumentative
theories.’”

I remained silent while Professor Maturin looked over his cases for a
book, and then stood leafing through it, until he found his place, and
said: “Hazlitt sums the matter up in his essay ‘On the Knowledge of
Character’ with these words: ‘There are various ways of getting at a
knowledge of character--by looks, words, actions. The first of these,
which seems the most superficial, is perhaps the safest, and least
liable to deceive:... A man’s look is the work of years; it is stamped
on his countenance by the events of his whole life, nay more, by the
hand of nature.... This sort of prima facie evidence shows what a man
is, better than what he says or does.’”




X

_Mental Hygiene_


As the Vicar, the Physician, and I entered Professor Maturin’s study,
after dinner, the Vicar sank into his chair with a deep sigh. “Is it so
bad as that?” queried Professor Maturin, as he passed the cigars. “I
beg a general pardon,” replied the Vicar. “To-day has quite tired me
out, although I am just back from a vacation.” The Physician gazed at
him professionally for a moment, and then said: “A clear case for the
Book of Mental Hygiene.” As we turned, expectant, Professor Maturin,
after some hesitation, took a portfolio from his desk, saying: “The
Physician refers to a collection of memoranda, drawn from my experience
and reading, during a series of years, but recently put into something
like order. They are semi-personal in substance, and quite staccato in
form, but I am very willing to read them if you will agree to stop me
when you have had enough.” Accepting our assent, he began:

“Now that science can cause the Ethiopian to change his skin and the
leopard his spots,--that is, can modify the color of rabbits and
multiply the toes of guinea-pigs, or graft new characteristics on
cattle or on grain,--it is high time to take thought for the efficient
and economic working of that intellectual machinery which is not only
the means to all such progress, but the fundamental condition of our
mental being. Even if we do not accept Professor Lankester’s view that
man has produced such a special state for himself that he must either
acquire firmer hold of the conditions, or perish, we must agree with
Professor James that the problem of access to different kinds of power
is a practical issue of supreme importance.

“Physical conditions, of course, are the basis of all mental hygiene.
Whatever may be the relation between body and mind, no one can doubt
its intimacy. Many persons, like Wordsworth and Lowell, suffer physical
prostration after mental exertion; nor does Dr. Johnson need to tell us
that ‘ill-health makes every one a scoundrel.’ Habits of confinement or
exercise mean so much that we might almost know from their work that
Balzac and Poe wrote in closed rooms; but that Wordsworth and Browning
composed in the open air, Burns and Scott on horseback, Swinburne while
swimming. It is true that, as Roger Ascham said, ‘walking alone into
the field hath no token of courage in it,’ and that the horsemanship
commended by Erasmus is expensive; but there are countless forms of
physical exercise, some suitable to each. George Sand set a standard
of wisdom in increasing her exercise when under especial strain. Food
and sleep also influence mental life tremendously. Whether we eat one
simple meal a day with Kant, or many varied ones with Goethe, we must
remember the laws of nutrition and Carlyle’s warning that indigestion
comprises all of the ills of life.

“The criteria for sleep likewise are wholly individual so long as
we do not drowse on other people’s hearth-rugs like De Quincey; or,
like Rossetti, entertain our callers by taking naps. Some think it
impossible to get too much sleep. Kant limited his for the sake of
soundness; he, moreover, carefully tranquillized his mind before going
to bed, not by a total exclusion of ideas but by a selection. Some
forms of analysis and combination appear to continue during sleep. Gray
had a friend who made verses in his dreams, and Bancroft’s bedtime
problems were often solved when he awoke. The time to sleep and the
time to wake must be left to individual instinct and social sanction.
The doctrine of deliberate rising--dear to Lamb and Hazlitt, Thackeray
and Lowell--has recently been reinforced by a French savant’s
declaration that getting up quickly leads to madness.

“Again, mental life is so conditioned by sensations that every man
should ask himself Professor Dowden’s list of questions concerning
them. What did not Tennyson owe to his hearing, Keats to his taste
and smell? Has anything ever affected human character more than the
present eye-mindedness due to printing and artificial lighting? We
have recently been shown the relation between thought and the jerks of
the eye in reading, and even between pessimism and eye-strain. What
might not be explained by nervous tension or arterial pressure, in
Dr. Holmes’s ‘bulbous-headed men’ or Donizetti’s creative headaches.
The very posture of the body is important in mental labor--many books
are cramped from being bent over. Writers in bed have scientific
endorsement for their approach to the horizontal. Yet, as this is hard
on the eyes, a reclining-chair like Milton’s seems better. But no habit
should be too rigid. It is unwise to risk Kant’s distress at the loss
of the weather-vane he gazed at While pondering; and one doubts whether
Schiller’s odor of rotten apples, or Gautier’s cat in his lap, or
Marryat’s lion-skin table were worth the trouble.

“Accommodation must be practiced also with regard to youth and age.
Whether through cellular differentiation or bacteria, age so profoundly
affects the mind that books might almost be classified according to the
productive ages of their authors.

“The influence of climate on mental life is beyond control, except as
we may choose our place of residence and vary our occupation according
to the season or the weather. Days vary according to the ebb and flow
of the vitality stored at week-ends--Monday often wasting energy that
is much missed by Friday. Deliberation and determination can do much
to increase efficiency and well-being by employing one’s best times
appropriately: prizing the cumulative value of unbroken hours,--of
morning concentration, afternoon acquisition, and evening meditation.
Those who cannot control the day must use the night--a French scientist
even advocates a watch in the middle of the night. There are no rules
of universal applicability, but study of the characteristics and
circumstances of our best moments may make possible their easy and
frequent duplication. That was Pater’s recipe for successful living.

“In the matter of environment, congenial surroundings means
spontaneous action. Yet lack of harmony may stimulate: pastoral poetry
and landscape painting are the work of men weary of towns. Both
town stimulus and country composure have corresponding values. Many
realistic and introspective writers agree with Poe that circumscription
of space aids concentration of attention: Pope worked best in his
grotto, Montaigne in his tower, and many great books have been written
in prisons. Many romanticists and philosophers, on the other hand,
prefer wide views from hills or mountains, or to be beside or upon the
sea. There are similar differences with regard to tidiness or disorder
among scholarly paraphernalia and personal belongings. Both efficiency
and happiness depend upon a nice individual balance of habit and
variety, freedom and restraint. Flaubert used the same study for forty
years, and Lecky could think only when perfectly tranquil; but William
Morris and Anthony Trollope liked to write on railway trains.

“As for mental society or solitude, there has been, as Edmund Gosse
puts it, ‘a strong sentiment of intellectual comradeship in every age
of real intellectual vitality.’ Philip Gilbert Hamerton was probably
right in saying that intellectual traditions persist more through
coteries than through books. Some general society is necessary to
cultivate tolerance and sympathy. One must also come to some adjustment
with democracy--its freedom and unrest, its ideal foundation and
materialistic structure, its lack of prejudice and its inexperience--we
cannot rest in Socrates’ opinion that the majority is merely a heap
of bad pennies. After the demands of social service are arranged for,
however, the intellect must look through and beyond popular standards,
and purchase independence at whatever cost. Much seclusion is essential
for knowledge, some solitude for wisdom. Both independence and sympathy
are attained through an inner circle of select companions, kept in
what Dr. Johnson called repair, by Emerson’s plan of allowing the less
interested to fall away and be replaced by choice additions.

“Mental health, moreover, demands some conscious agreement with one’s
income, and some mastery of expenditure. Too much money is as bad as
too little. A generous amount insures free activity and rich material,
but it relaxes determination and demands discrimination. Wealth is
essential for works of great accumulation in history, or of fine
appreciation in the arts. But humanists appear to be none the worse for
poverty--Cervantes was a public letter-writer, and his family took
in washing. It is well, in any case, to learn with Socrates how many
things one does not need, and to remember that there are uses even for
adversity.

“From physical foundation and social setting we approach
personality:--that something peculiarly our own which, in the words of
Petrarch, ‘it is both easier and wiser to cultivate and to correct than
to alter;’ that something within us which, in the words of Emerson,
‘accepts and disposes of impressions after a native, individual law.’
We grow in wisdom as we grow in the knowledge of such inner laws.
They are fundamental and inevitable. They control mental life and are
not to be controlled save through much self-realization. Is a man
instinctively active, or does he love contemplation and the forsaking
of works? Is he single-minded, identified with his occupation, or does
he work merely for bread and live, for himself alone, in some dear
avocation? The single-minded may look forward to the perfection that
comes from practice--and toward becoming subdued to what he works in.
Hence Charles Lamb on the melancholy of tailors and Dr. Robertson
Nicoll on Matthew Arnold as ever the inspector of schools. Other men
show their spontaneity and genuineness in their avocations--witness
Michael Angelo’s sonnets and Victor Hugo’s sketches. Little intentional
literature has charmed the world like the amateur quatrains of Omar the
astronomer, translated by Fitzgerald the dilettante.

“Is a man an idealist or a realist? Let him ponder Don Quixote’s
impracticality and Sancho Panza’s aimlessness, following inner impulse
or outward stimulus, denying the world or losing his own soul. Let
him ponder, moreover, Rembrandt’s struggle to serve both at the same
time. The pitfalls of the realist are proverbial, but ideals, also, may
be dangerous, through mistaken selection, partial generalization, or
imperfect adjustment to the facts in hand.

“What, again, are our innate or acquired interests and desires? Does
their vision of the future help or hinder our realization of the
present? Do we aspire after the impossible, expecting precision or
clarity, brevity or completeness, where they cannot or should not be?
Do we apprehend the unlikely? ‘If anything external vexes you,’ says
Marcus Aurelius, ‘take notice that it is not the thing which disturbs
you, but your notion about it, which notion you may dismiss at once
if you please.’ Disappointment, says Dr. Johnson, ‘you may easily
compensate by enjoining yourself some particular study, or opening
some new avenue to information.’ If we cannot attain, like Lamb, to
hissing our failures, let us, like La Motte, retire to a Trappist
monastery, and drown consciousness in study. Let us not expect ideal
conditions--Spencer and Huxley could work but three hours a day. Let us
look, if necessary, to our compensations. Napoleon had satisfactions
in spite of his standing forty-second at military school. Darwin’s
inability to master languages and his loss of pleasure in poetry,
painting, music, and natural scenery were more than made up for. Let us
hope for no ‘simple, plausible, easy solution of life that will free
us from all responsibility;’ but endeavor to apprehend and ennoble our
practical religion, that scale of values according to which we spend
our hoard of life.

“Mental action varies with individuals, yet Emerson’s general statement
is true--‘thought is a kind of reception uncontrolled by will; we can
only open our senses and clear away obstructions; suddenly thought
engages us; afterward we remember the process and its results.’
Attention, however, may be led, if not driven; sensibility may become
dirigible; it is possible to learn how to keep a fresh eye. Observation
of our reactions will make possible a wise selection among stimuli; so
Gray learned to seek music, Darwin to avoid it, and many have come to
some conscious relation between reading and writing. Experience will
teach us how to free the mind from haunting suggestions by fixing and
holding their values; how to recollect emotion in tranquillity; how to
begin work slowly, and steadily, and then accelerate; how to value the
process as well as the product of acquisition. We may learn, through
the slowness of accumulation, that we retain only what we use, that a
bad memory may be the best, because selective, that even leisure may
be well employed. ‘Whatever I do or do not do,’ said Sainte-Beuve, ‘I
cease not to learn from the book of life.’ Lope de Vega, sailing with
the Armada, sacrificed all his manuscripts for gun-wads, but landed
with eleven thousand new verses.

“With such realization of ends and calculation of means, production
reduces itself largely to a matter of method. ‘The difference
between persons,’ said Emerson, ‘is not in wisdom, but in the art
of classifying and using facts.’ Each mind has some ways in which
it works most easily and efficiently; let us discover and arrange
for these, and reap the rewards. Then it is time to remember Dante’s
saying that ‘sitting upon down one cometh not to fame,’ and Whistler’s
that ‘drudgery leads to felicity,’ and Emerson’s that ‘inspiration
is the sister of daily labor.’ Newton made his discoveries ‘simply
by always thinking about them.’ Darwin’s method was as elaborate
as it was successful--with portfolios of abstracts, memoranda, and
references; detailed, general, and classified indexes for books;
brief, then full, then minute outlines before beginning to write.
Concentration and intensity of thought come almost of themselves
through such a system. Darwin’s practice, too, of writing rapidly and
later correcting deliberately, reaped the reward of both states of mind
without suffering the loss involved in continually changing from one
adjustment to another,--that drain of energy which makes interruptions
so wasteful, even to minds that focus quickly. Wisely controlled change
combines the benefits of continuity and variety. The scientist, whose
study requires muscular as well as mental activity, tires less easily
than the scholar busied wholly with books. Varying the adjustment
of the same part, or successively occupying different parts of the
mechanism, is more refreshing than total relaxation.

“While thus adapted to the mental mechanism, a successful system
must also be adjustable to the material in hand. Observation must
be receptive, reading selective. Poets may harvest their dreams;
historians must winnow their documents. Goethe’s ‘vast abundance
of objects that must be before us ere we can think upon them,’ and
Hawthorne’s ‘immense amount of history that it takes to make a little
literature,’ must be provided for, along with Pater’s selection and
rejection--‘all art does but consist in the removal of surplusage.’
Every system ought to provide, at any time and in any place, some
form of record, careful enough to be permanent, yet so simple as not
to be wasteful if never used--an envelope that can contain data or
be written upon itself meets these needs. A system for preservation
and arrangement must be comprehensive enough to include everything,
accurate enough to make everything available, flexible enough to vary
with any need, yet so simple as not to become a tax. Few devices are
better than Darwin’s labelled portfolios, or smaller envelopes arranged
alphabetically or logically. Note-books are useful only when abstracted
or indexed. There are clergymen whose sermons write themselves as
particular texts accumulate references in the interleaved Bibles in
which they note what interests them. For coördination and organization
few things equal a tabular abstract on a single sheet of paper large
enough to show at a glance the nature of all the material. Such
implements influence intellectual efficiency more than we suppose. Much
crabbed writing is due to bad pens, much journalistic ease to soft
pencils. Self-realization and the sense of life depend upon some form
of diary; style varies with dictation and the typewriter.

“The chief criteria of mental efficiency, then,” read Professor
Maturin, with a glance at the clock, “lie between Matthew Arnold’s
definitions of genius--‘mainly an affair of energy’ and ‘an infinite
capacity for taking pains.’ Professor James, holding that the average
man uses only a small part of his energy, would have us persist through
fatigue and ‘second wind,’ perhaps to a third and a fourth. Even if
experiment, however, did not show that working beyond the fatigue
point yields a rapidly decreasing product at a rapidly increasing
cost, it would be uneconomic to attempt to increase our flow of
energy so long as we waste so much of what we have in inefficient and
unhygienic methods of work. Let us rather study the conditions of our
best moments, clear away hindrances, and provide helps. Let us prize
the spontaneous activity of each state, using fortunate moments for
concentration, less efficient periods for accumulation and selection,
looking to future coördination. Let us follow natural rhythms of
activity, relaxing primary activities by secondary functions useful
also in themselves. Thus regularity and routine will develop speed;
accumulation and economy end in ripeness. Quantity condenses into
quality; selection and arrangement grow into judgment and intuition
that may bear inspiration and vision. ‘A man’s vision,’ says Professor
James, ‘is the great thing about him.’ The natural history of such
vision, however, indicates that it is scarcely more than the synthetic
apex of long and careful accumulation. The moment of the aperçu is so
memorable that the conditions precedent are usually forgotten, but the
precious brilliance of the diamond is merely the result of a happy
crystallization of common elements.

“For all of which,” concluded Professor Maturin with a smile, as he
closed his portfolio, “I bespeak your most esteemed consideration.”




XI

_The Mystery of Dress_


Professor Maturin was leaning sidewise on his cane, gazing at the
river. I stood by his side several moments before he came out of his
reverie, greeted me warmly, and proposed a walk along the Drive.

“I was thinking,” said he, “of Fitzgerald’s falling overboard and
coming up serenely, still wearing his top hat. This morning, while
reading Scarron’s sonnet on the decay of the pyramids and his black
doublet, I noticed that I too needed a new coat. Later, I lunched
with one colleague who is as dressy as Disraeli, and another who goes
almost as much out at elbows as Napoleon when he entered Moscow. I have
just left a third, who is devoted to Lowell’s favorite combination
of short coat and top hat. That brought me, by way of Old Fitz, to a
general contemplation of the custom of wearing clothes. Hast any such
philosophy in thee, shepherd?”

“But little, I fear,” replied I, “unless Carlyle’s will do.”

“Scarcely, if you mean ‘Sartor Resartus,’” was his answer. “Do you
believe that man, by nature a naked animal, is demoralized by clothes,
and that a return to nudity would dissolve society? On the contrary,
when Humphrey Howarth, the surgeon, went to a duel naked for fear of
the infection of cloth in a gunshot wound, his antagonist came to his
senses and withdrew his challenge. Of course, I agree that whatever
represents spirit is a kind of clothing, and that wisdom looks through
vestures to realities. But clothes in ‘Sartor’ are merely the beginning
of a philosophy of things in general. Carlyle’s irritation when
Browning called on him in a green riding-coat, and his own refusal to
carry an umbrella are more to my point. It is obviously appropriate
that George Borrow should always have carried an umbrella, I understand
how Goethe could ignore waistcoats and Coleridge forget his shirt, but
why did Dickens dress like a dandy and Swinburne like a farmer? What do
clothes mean?”

“They sometimes represent the state of their owners’ finances,” said I.
“Lack of suitable clothing made Poe decline dinners and Johnson dine
behind the screen--if he really did.”

“And Lovelace vary between cloth of gold and rags,” continued Professor
Maturin meditatively, “much as Rembrandt varies his dress in his
portraits of himself. But that was when one man would wear the worth
of a thousand oaks and a hundred oxen, when mantles were conferred
by royal patent, and orders grew rich out of hat monopolies. To-day,
however, in spite of adulterations that I am told call for a pure
textile law, few of us are in need either of Pepys’ prayers to be able
to pay his tailor, or of Lord Westminster’s thrifty making over his
servants’ liveries for himself.

“Habit influences us more than cost, but what influences habit? Why
did Milton always wear black, Pope gray, and Lamb snuff color? Why did
distributing his cast clothes ‘disconsolate and intender’ Montaigne?
Why did Tennyson send his old clothes to be measured for new ones?
Why do I find myself repeating an outfit I once chose because it
suggested what naturalists call protective coloration--when an animal,
like a squirrel on a tree-trunk, is scarcely distinguishable from its
background? Do I make a good principle gloss a dull habit?”

“Such a habit,” I replied, “like George Fox’s suit of leather, does
deprive you of the interest that accompanies even unsuccessful effort
for variety. The fairer sex is never wearied in its quest of beautiful
garb, nor sated with the rapture of attainment.”

“How curiously we have changed all that,” replied Professor Maturin,
“in the three centuries since James Howell said that a letter should be
attired simply, like a woman; an oration richly, like a man. I would
not, like him, have putting on a clean shirt an occasion for special
prayer; but perhaps we have gone too far in our neglect of finery. Dr.
Holmes’s counsel, ‘always err upon the safe side,’ may be too cautious.
Allingham says that Leigh Hunt was old in street costume, but young in
his dressing-gown. Perhaps Goldsmith’s satin, or Jefferson’s plush, or
Mark Twain’s white flannels would renew my youth.”

“Are you elated by your scarlet gown on Commencement Day?” said I.

“By no means so much as the boys are,” he replied with a chuckle. “But
that suggests another aspect of the matter. Outward and visible signs
move those who are blind to inward graces. Since Protestantism is
retrieving some of its banished ceremonial, it might advance learning
to clothe it with more circumstance. Yet, we seem to hesitate at
symbolic clothing. Police and military uniforms help law and order, but
we tolerate ecclesiastical, judicial, and academic costume only during
the performance of specific functions. We are so far from intellectual
blue-stockings and political _sans-culottes_, that we smile at
musicians’ hair and painters’ cloaks, and banish yachting and golf
clothes from every-day wear.

“Simplicity seems the only unwritten law that has succeeded so many
written ones concerning clothes. Tradition itself is weak. We wear the
Roman orator’s neck-cloth, the wrist-bands that marked the gentleman’s
freedom from manual labor, the nobleman’s black evening clothes, the
courtier’s sword-belt and gauntlet buttons, and a sailor king’s long
trousers--but all because we wish to, or, at least, do not mind. Names
are naught, whether of mackintoshes or cravenettes or bluchers or
tam-o’-shanters. We ignore even fashion, with its ever varying promise
of equality to the uncomely and its powerful economic urge. We are
emancipated by a common sense in clothes that would have jailed a man
in Addison’s day.

“We may dress as we like, so long as we are inconspicuous, but we
must be that. We will no longer tolerate clothes-advertising like the
Admirable Crichton’s. The man who lost his lawsuit for damages because
his horse ran away when he saw the first top hat in England, would
recover at least costs to-day. Gautier deserved the mobbing his pink
doublet cost him. Tennyson was right to charge a young woman with
creaking stays, and to apologize when he found that the sound came from
his own braces.”

“What other principles would you adduce?” said I.

“A modicum of care,” he continued, “in agreement with Plato and Ruskin,
that ‘clothes carefully cared for and rightly worn, show a balanced
mind.’ I would have clothes appropriate, too, to climate, use, and the
individuality of the wearer. I was once advised, most profitably, by
a friendly portrait painter as to what was appropriate to my figure,
features, and coloring. He objected especially to my hats.

“It is curious how difficult hats are,” continued Professor Maturin,
after a pause that I forbore to break. “I doubt if any one, except
Fortunatus, ever had a perfect one. The Greeks were wise in having
little to do with them--suppose all Greek statues had their straw
bonnets tied under the chin! Indeed, hats are chiefly developments of
the last five centuries, and, it is said, baldness with them. Yet,
Synesius wrote ‘In Praise of Baldness;’ Caesar prized the privilege of
continually wearing a laurel crown because it hid his, and I do not
know why else the academic mortar-board comes down so far behind. I
will not wear a ventilating hat like Rossetti’s, although I long for
summer and the straws that America has done so much to popularize.

“I am too thin for the comfortable Tennysonian sombrero. I enjoy, as
a dressing-gown, a cowled Capuchin robe that I once had made on Lake
Orta, because of my theory that the flowering of the monastic mind
in the Middle Ages was due to the germinating heat of hoods. But,
generally, I would emulate an acquaintance who usually carries his
hat in his hand, or another who actually owns none, were that not too
conspicuous. Even Leigh Hunt’s charming essay on ‘Hats, Ancient and
Modern’ has no help for me--although I believe I might like a cocked
hat or a chapeau.

“I can take comfort in a coat,” he continued, “if it is loose; and in
overcoats, if they resemble Socrates’ cloak, or the cloak that Petrarch
bequeathed to Boccaccio. Indeed, I should welcome a return to shawls. I
am uncomfortable in any neckwear but black, or in any but reindeer gray
gloves. I should disesteem trousers had I not once inadvertently worn
a striped pair with evening clothes--since then I have respected their
power. In shoes I emulate Wellington’s care, for, like William Morris,
I need rather large ones. And I enjoy canes as much as Wellington did
umbrellas.”

“All of which,” said I, as we reached Professor Maturin’s door, “even
if unvaried, is sufficiently sober, appropriate, and individual.”

“And simple enough,” concluded he, “for Frederick the Great or
Newton. But, most of all, I wish that the Germans would extend their
investigations in the hygiene of clothing. If we knew more about that,
we might trust its architecture and ornamentation to any discriminating
tailor.”




XII

_Questions at Issue_


The Sindbad Society at its last meeting--on the night of the full moon,
according to custom--met within the hospitable doors of the Ollapod
Club. There, in the room with the roses on the ceiling, we had for
dinner caviare with limes, a thin mushroom soup, duck roasted over
spice-wood, Turinese pepperoni of chilies and preserved grapes, Leghorn
coffee, and Turkish sweetmeats.

The archaeologist was hot against such modern abuses as motor boats
in Venice, and motor cars on what he called the finest roads in the
world--those from Nice to Genoa, Amalfi to Sorrento, and Ragusa to
Gravosa. But when the diplomat begged him also to ban the ancient and
dishonorable dogs from Constantinople, he became resigned to life’s
little ironies, and, in response to a general request, described quite
wonderfully how, after years of fruitless digging, he had found a
royal tomb in Egypt, and entered its hot silence, to find its stately
presences, its furniture and linen, its sacrificial bread and incense
and flowers, all with their sense of yesterday enduring through the
ages.

This prompted the musician, who was reared in Turkey, to tell how an
Arab sheik he used to visit in the desert always bore with him the same
atmosphere of untold centuries. The colonel followed, queerly enough,
by saying that in his aeroplane tests he always had the same impression
of the endless duration of time. Then some one broke the happy spell,
as people will, with something clever and distracting, although the
joke was good enough--James Howell’s on people who “travel much but see
little, like Jonah in the whale.”

At that the talk scattered, the colonel describing Coromandel and
Malabar, the biologist a boat he was building, the mountain-climber
planning for Alaska, and the painter for Japan, until the psychologist
asked the last why he was going there.

The painter bent his head sidewise for a moment, as he does when he is
thoughtful, and then said: “Partly for the natural beauty, but chiefly
to study an art that does not disturb the truth of its impressions by
conscious theories like our perspective; that honors color and emotion
as well as line and thought.”

“Your psychology is sound,” commented the other. “Color vision is
very organic, which is to say, emotional; being apparently caused by
minute chemical changes in the eye, under the action of light. The
appreciation of line, on the other hand, seems to be due to mental
association with touching and feeling, and therefore is rather a matter
of attention and judgment.”

“Will you kindly explain me also?” asked the musician, who had been
telling how no one knows his own voice in a phonograph, because every
one hears his own speech reverberate through his inner, as well as his
outer ear.

“Music is the most emotional and the most rhythmical of the arts,”
continued the psychologist, “because the auditory nerve keeps close
company in the brain with nerves from the heart and lungs. Melody is
merely a series of answers to the body’s expectation of its usual
rhythm. As one of your own critics has said, when music seems to be
yearning for the unutterable it is only yearning for the next note.”

The musician quelled the psychologist with an imaginary baton, which he
then pointed at the biologist, saying, “Pray prove to the psychologist
that he is nothing but pulp.”

“He is surely little else,” smiled the biologist, “built by evolution
and run by a chemical engine.”

“Out on you scientists and your evolution!” broke in the archaeologist.
“Can your mechanism make a Raphael, a Shakespeare, a Beethoven? Can
your evolution show any architecture, sculpture, statecraft, drama,
or philosophy equal to those of the age of Pericles? The world will
produce nothing fine or permanent so long as you fellows tinker
with its machinery. Your heresy of universal progress is merely a
contemporary mythology that is falser than--”

“Softly, softly,” said Professor Maturin, shaking his long forefinger
at the disputants. “The true philosopher, with Dante, loves every part
of wisdom. Why can we not all enjoy knowing that cats hear better than
dogs, and, at the same time, appreciate Blake’s saying that the sun is
not a round ball of fire, but the glory of the universe?”

Everybody prepared to be mollified until Professor Maturin undid his
peacemaking by asking the astronomer to tell us all what a comet
looked like. When the astronomer replied that he had not looked
through a telescope for years, but spent his time entirely in making
calculations, the archaeologist threw up his hands and moved over to
the painter and the musician, growling that he was going to spend the
rest of the evening talking to somebody he understood.

I heard the two eagerly agree with him that the Nile was the finest
river in the world, if you were there in November, but that you ought
never go to Japan except in summer, and then I moved to other groups,
where the mountaineer was comparing the view of the eternal snows from
Darjeeling with that of valley, river, and sea from Mount Wellington,
in Tasmania; or the diplomat was telling about Bulgaria; or the
importer describing the Taj Mahal by moonlight; or the psychologist
quoting, with a twinkle toward the archaeologist, Sir Francis Galton’s
saying, that men who are too bad for Europe go to Constantinople, those
who are too bad for Constantinople go to Cairo, and those who are too
bad for Cairo go to Khartoum.

Everybody talked for a long while, since this was the last meeting for
the year, and in spite of the earlier disagreement, which was, perhaps,
more apparent than real, I remember the evening as one of especial
illumination.




XIII

_The Fountain of Youth_


Professor Maturin’s study lamps were dimmed to the mellow glow that
makes good talk. But his coffee and cigars were so worthy of the dinner
we had just ended that we continued to smoke in silent content, until
our host asked about the Vicar’s vacation.

“My plans are about as usual,” answered that worthy, naming his
sea-shore place without enthusiasm.

“Mine, too, are about the same,” added Professor Maturin, naming his
similar place, with a similar lack of interest.

The Physician hemmed severely and shifted in his chair. “Let us have
it,” smiled Professor Maturin.

“Why will you act as though you were a hundred years old?” said he.

“Perhaps we feel so, sometimes,” replied Professor Maturin, while the
Vicar nodded. “I fancy we would not ignore the fountain of youth, if we
knew where it was.”

“It isn’t far,” retorted the Physician; “it’s merely open air and
exercise.”

“I love open air,” said Professor Maturin, “but I hate what is usually
called exercise.”

“Naturally,” replied the Physician, “being a man of mind. The cult
of muscle is ridiculous in intellectual people. Muscle and vitality
are by no means the same, and you cannot do much for either through
unnatural gymnastics. But I mean by exercise the maintenance of harmony
between one’s specialized functions and what may be called fundamental
activity, so that the whole works together happily and spontaneously.
Such a balance is as easy to preserve as it is important. We evolved
as we are through a series of large general movements, and we need to
continue enough of those to preserve a coördination that complements
and supplements the particular functions that we most practice. Thus,
we walk upright, instead of on all fours, probably as the result of
long reaching and climbing. Climbing is not always convenient, but one
may practice setting up exercises anywhere until he feels as upright
and as sprightly as a primate. I grant you it may not seem dignified,”
admitted the Physician, as the Vicar smiled at the picture, “but it
means health and happiness, and perhaps life itself.”

“Your suasion is seductive,” said Professor Maturin, “but how is one
to know precisely what he needs, and when?”

“Take, for illustration,” resumed the Physician, “those moments when
you feel the need of exercise. A little analysis of the sensation will
make you aware of a kind of hunger for activity in some particular
muscle. A little ingenuity will devise some appropriate exercise, and
its moderate practice will both meet the particular need that was felt
and diffuse a general tone of well-being.

“Conversely, a general or a local sense of well-being will seem to
demand expression in action. A little abandon at such moments will
suggest exercises that are both pleasant and profitable to the body and
interesting and enjoyable to the mind. Similarly, mental and emotional
states will often suggest free and exuberant bodily expression.

“Any thoughtful man, moreover, may deduce from the nature of his
ordinary occupations what larger vital activities he should have. Thus,
trunk and chest exercises would complement your special functions as
professional speakers, and your sedentary study calls for supplemental
arm and leg exercises in the open air. Professional singers illustrate
the successful development and maintenance of special functions
through related and supplemental activities.

“In short, if exercise is spontaneous and rational, qualitative rather
than quantitative, for the nerves rather than for the muscles, it will
improve the efficiency and facility of one’s habitual occupation, will
establish a general vigor and stability of body, and maintain mental
balance and alertness; and, I repeat, such varied and recreative
activities will suggest themselves to any thoughtful person, although
it is wise, occasionally, to secure professional approval or amendment
of them. In general, any moderate exercise that interests or stirs
enthusiasm is good. Games, especially, correct nervousness and banish
self-consciousness through their impersonal aim or coöperative effort,
and they improve bodily structure and function by the way. Bowling,
boxing, fencing, and billiards are good. Tennis and golf are better,
because they are out of doors. Golf is almost the best, because it is
interesting, moderate, and available throughout life.”

“I could never become interested in any game,” said Professor Maturin;
“their artificial rules are irksome to me, and to acquire the skill
necessary to make them enjoyable oppresses me as a waste of time.”

“Even so,” rejoined the Physician, “there are plenty of health-giving
pursuits that have also some utility in themselves. Among such are
the handicrafts and gardening; walking, riding, and all sorts of
excursions; swimming, rowing, and sailing. Swimming, especially, is
natural and interesting; it employs many members harmoniously, it
quiets and invigorates nerve action, and gives strength and grace,
self-control and confidence. I should prescribe for you both this
summer a daily swim, with plenty of floating on a quiet shore, and
then, if you become as refreshed as you should, something more, like
learning to sail. What, by the way, is your avoirdupois?” Neither
Professor Maturin nor the Vicar had been weighed in years.

“Weight is an important indication of health,” continued the Physician.
“Every man, I think, should have a complete health examination and
record at least once a year. Defects can then be promptly remedied, and
occupation and recreation be properly adjusted to individual capacities
or limitations. One’s family and personal history and tendency should
be considered in everything. More than a third of us have remediable
defects in sight, about a tenth in hearing, and so many people neglect
their teeth that they cause, Dr. Osler says, more deterioration than
alcohol. Digestion has a way of announcing its disturbances, but the
heart and spine disorders that one-tenth of us have are usually allowed
to spread their deterioration unheeded; while almost nobody considers
the structure and function of the feet as important as they are.”

“I remember,” said the Vicar with a smile, “your first prescription for
me--a looser hat, firmer shoes, and a belt instead of braces.”

“But does not such self-knowledge make one morbid?” queried Professor
Maturin. “Have I not heard of a physician who had to abandon practice
because he fancied himself afflicted with every disease that be
diagnosed?”

“Surely,” responded the Physician, “you refer to Ferguson--the less
we think about our own anatomy and physiology the better; but your
physician must know them to keep you in health, as well as to extricate
you from disease. Knowledge about sanitation and hygiene, however,
is both intelligible and helpful to a practical belief in personal
and social health and good living. I wish that every one would preach
as well as practice my favorite prescriptions of less heat and more
humidity indoors, gray-green wall-papers and furniture to fit the
individual, vacuum cleaners and patent filters, and, ever, more fresh
air. Outdoor air is the most valuable therapeutic that we know, just
as it is the cheapest and the most neglected. Forty per cent of our
mortality is due to neglect of fresh air.

“If, in fine, every aspect of life were considered first from the point
of view of health; or if food and sleep and exercise and good air were
put even on a par with other interests, we would have so much vitality
that we might practically dispense with effort and enjoy all the profit
and pleasure of spontaneity. Instead, we so neglect the entire physical
basis that we allow a hurried breakfast, a heavy coat, an uncomfortable
chair, or a bad light to spoil a whole day’s work, and, perhaps,
permanently to damage the worker. Sedentary students ignore the need
for activity until interest and perception grow sluggish, memory dims,
and minds that should produce snap-shots require long time-exposures.
If, on the other hand, we would only practice a complete, instead of a
partial, economy, we should all be twice as efficient and happy.”

“You are surely right,” said Professor Maturin thoughtfully. “Plato was
called so because of his broad shoulders, Xenophon and Erasmus loved
horses, and Ronsard gardening. Christopher North walked from London
to Oxford after dinner. Fitzgerald sailed half the year. The Physician
does well to lecture us, dominie. Let us both reform, and go in for
Greek sanity and the joy of the age of chivalry. The times have changed
since the Bishop of London was the licenser for physicians. But,” he
continued, as we rose to go, “if the Vicar and I promise to practice
your preachment this summer, what shall we do when we come back to
town? My walking up and down and the Vicar’s riding evidently need
something more, by way of paprika.”

“I hope eventually to convert you both to golf,” smiled the Physician,
“but until then, observe your needs and invent exercises to meet them,
as I have indicated. Write me out a list of your inventions this
summer; in the autumn I will go over both you and them, and perhaps
suggest others. Next year I may prescribe mountains and motor cars for
variety. Meanwhile, use the fountain of youth and prepare to live long
and prosper.”

“Good-by, good-by,” said Professor Maturin. “Many thanks. You have
surely suggested a great perhaps.”




XIV

_The Contemporary Fiction Company_


“Excellently well met,” said Professor Maturin, as we nearly collided
on a down-town sidewalk,--“excellently well met. Come with me to the
Contemporary Fiction Company.”

“And what may that be?” I inquired.

“I do not yet quite know,” he replied, “but with your kindly aid I hope
soon to learn.”

The visible part of the Contemporary Fiction Company proved to be a
private corridor in an office building, surrounded by half a dozen
rooms occupied by young men and women and typewriters. Its master-mind
was evidently the youthful but most business-like president, who
included me in his welcome to Professor Maturin, and described his
company as a semi-mutual corporation engaged in the production of
fiction for the trade.

“Our staple,” said the president, “is short stories, and in the present
state of the market we can scarcely keep even with our orders. Last
week we delivered one dozen each of aviation, automobile, rural and
suburban, settlement and sociology, power-boat and yachting, and two
dozen heart-interest stories. To-day we ship a dozen near-Mexico army
and navies, a rush order. We are now at work on a gross of adventure
stories for a syndicate. The magazines are delighted to find that we
may be depended upon to supply precisely what they want just when
they want it, and save them the infinite annoyance of dealing with
individual authors; and they also find that our rates for quantity
save them a good deal of money. Therefore we are working up to
our capacity of about seventy stories a week, and, incidentally,
accumulating a tidy little surplus. Our system is very simple. I
and the secretary-treasurer control the company, and draw up the
specifications for all work. The sketching, filling in, and finishing
are done by heads of departments, who hold smaller blocks of stock, and
by junior assistants, whose salaries are a share of the profits--a plan
that insures their best interest and efficiency. But I fear that I bore
you--” he hesitated.

Being assured of our very great interest, the president led us to a
long table beside which stood several drawers from filing-cases on a
kind of rolling truck. “I have been working here on the specifications
for the adventure stories I spoke of,” he continued, taking up a
sheaf of printed blanks. “Here are some beginnings from the Action
file. This newspaper clipping headed ‘Fireman rescues four’ is not
uncommon, but you can see the story grow when you combine it with this
one--‘Little girl gets pass to feed fire horses.’ This next clipping
is sufficient in itself--‘Freighter sails to Africa to barter beads
for wild animals.’ These others--‘Palace ablaze,’ ‘Island sinks,’ and
‘Whole town destroyed’--are also promising. Here is an item from the
Anecdote file--‘A young fellow in a supper restaurant stares rudely at
a lady, and flicks his cigarette-ash in the face of her remonstrating
escort. The latter picks up the offender, shakes him like a bottle, and
returns him gently to his chair. The escort happens to be Sandow.’ In
dull seasons we make up action outlines from lives of filibusters and
explorers, from opera librettos and plays, and, finally, from nursery
rhymes. You are perhaps surprised at the last, but they contain a great
deal of fundamental human interest.

“Having selected a number of such Action-starts, as we call them, we
turn to Situation. Here are some items from that file--‘Saw Flying
Dutchman,’ ‘Racing against ship fire,’ ‘Chinese crew burns joss-sticks
to comet.’ Cut out the comet, and all of these items go with the
African barter ship. ‘Religious sect awaits the end of the world’--that
may combine with ‘Island sinks’ or ‘Whole town destroyed.’ These others
furnish Situation-starts--‘Smuggling by aeroplane,’ ‘Foreign officers
caught spying on forts,’ ‘Colonial returns displeased with home,’
‘Has custom house search her social rival,’ ‘Fashionable women see
prize-fight.’ That last gives a welcome variation from the conventional
Monte Carlo gambling-hall opening. Many stories, of course, we begin
with ‘Character-starts.’ Some of these come from clippings, like the
following--‘Man who feeds nuts to squirrels,’ ‘Dead laborer was wealthy
sociologist,’ ‘Former waiter becomes hotel manager.’ Members of the
staff, also, turn in suggestions, like the following--‘The man with the
wardrobe trunk,’ ‘Doubles in appearance but not in character,’ ‘Hero
and centre of story who never appears.’ Gradually we are making up a
canon of contemporary characters like the famous stock characters of
the Roman or the Restoration comedy. Butlers and sailors, engineers and
explorers, are staple. Bosses and spies are a bit stale, and we are
going slow on commercial travellers and advertising managers. But we
are featuring the army-woman, and we expect a good response to our new
ticket-chopper series. Live new characters are always in demand.

“The last general specification is ‘Setting and Scene,’ like--‘Oil
fire fogs the river,’ and so forth. We consider scene so important
that we have in every office Stevenson’s words, ‘Culminating moments,
epoch-making scenes, that strike the mind’s eye, put the last mark of
truth upon a story.’”

After again hesitating and being again assured of our extreme interest,
the president continued: “Theme, character, action, incident,
situation, and scene being thus stated on the specification blanks, we
write in hints for Treatment. Thus we keep the characters as simple as
possible, trying for individual examples of conventional types, for
definite persons that develop sharply, in small groups, with strong
contrasts. The presentation we elaborate as much as possible--how the
characters affect one another and display themselves in deeds and
words. We cut out analysis and comment, but expand on appearance,
manner, dress, and speech. Similarly, in action we make the pulsation
of interest primary: emphasizing expectation, uncertainty, surprise,
and quick solutions. With these various suggestions the specifications
go the rounds of the heads of departments, each of whom makes further
additions representing his special field. When the blanks come back
we finally approve or amend them, and assign the stories for writing.
Each junior assistant writes about one story a day, directly on the
typewriter. When each story is written to the specified length,
the writer adds a title, and the piece goes the round of the heads
of departments once more, for approval or amendment. All details
of character, or action, or setting that are questioned are either
omitted, or verified from sources in the office, or referred to people
outside who know. A slight seasoning of humor is also written in
wherever the characters would express or display it. We are, however,
very conservative about humor, since it is impossible to know how
readers will take it. Irony and satire are so generally misunderstood
that we exclude them altogether.

“Finally, our style man supervises all dialogue and diction. He is
learned in every form of literary speech from Platonic symposia
and mediaeval disputation, down to mid-Victorian table talk and
contemporary slang. He sees that all conversation is clear and
consistent. In style he suffers nothing that is not expressive of
the matter or instantly intelligible to the average reader, and yet,
under his criticism, the style of our output is on a very high level.
He hates adjectives, and has an eye even for syllables and letters,
being severe with explosives and gutturals and cordial to liquids and
labials. He has a collection of fine lines of verse to be memorized by
any assistant whose diction grows commonplace. It was he who devised
our system of naming characters from places, in order to avoid the
possibility of annoying actual people, although he does sometimes
invent names to suit characters--like Mrs. Grandy, or Miss Miniver, or
Monsieur Galantin. It was he, also, who devised our system of signing
each story with a name appropriate to its variety, so that these
signatures become trade names. Many of our best titles, too, are his.
He named ‘Mary-Go-Round’ and ‘Helping Harrington,’ ‘Yellow Jacket’ and
‘The Golden Goose,’ ‘The Rule of Three’ and ‘One Hundred and One,’ and
our ‘Half-portion’ and ‘Tales of To-day’ series. He becomes an officer
of the company shortly, investing some of his large outside earnings
from naming apartment houses, sleeping-cars, and manufactured articles
like the ‘Fair-price products.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

“But what will be the effect upon literature?” I wondered, when we were
again upon the street.

“It will have no effect upon literature,” said Professor Maturin.




XV

_The Old Doctor_


“The Old Doctor is dead,” said Professor Maturin, holding up a marked
newspaper, as he led the way to two easy chairs before the fire. “He
was a very individual man of power and integrity, a philosopher as well
as a physician--one of those rare people who love and tell the naked
truth. So far as I know, he never blinked a fact nor shirked a danger.
I feel as though I had known him all his life. For the last twenty
years I have seen him only occasionally. But I saw much of him when I
was a boy and a young fellow home from college, and my family knew him
intimately before I was born.

“As a small boy on some family errand I used often to wait in his outer
office, looking through its window to the street, or gazing at its one
engraving of a lion staring at the sun, or its portrait of an Italian
physician who gave his life to conquer the plague. I always jumped when
the doors of the inner office slid apart and the old doctor stood, one
hand on each door, with his large head bent and his gray-blue eyes
intent upon me from their ambush of tumbled yellowish hair and bristly
beard. His rapid questions, in a rich but husky voice, always upset me,
and although I knew him to be kindliness itself, I always responded
shakily to his summons into his sanctum.

“I can see him, vividly, now, as he sat there writing prescriptions,
his tall, thin form bent over his desk, his left hand, white and
shapely, holding the paper, his right, heavier and stained, tracing the
words with nervous jerks and a lavish expenditure of ink. I see at the
same time both the thinning thatch of his broad forehead and the much
creased silk skull-cap that crowned his wrinkles later.

“That inner office was crowded with cases that reached to the ceiling
and overflowed with books and papers and glittering instruments
that proclaimed their owner surgeon as well as physician. The old
doctor seldom allowed his servants, whom he chose and kept with more
kindliness than discretion, to enter it. And it was so full of all
sorts of things that it seemed quite disorderly, although its owner
could put his hand instantly on anything that he wanted. The whole
place was redolent, moreover, of many drugs and, I regret to say, of
horse-blankets. Sometimes, for exercise, the old doctor walked on his
rounds--paying little heed to the road, moving fast or slow, upright or
bent, according to the thought that abstracted him. But mostly he drove
in a much-splashed chaise, a handsome, well-blooded, but ill-groomed
horse, to which he was devoted. He was faithful all his life to such
speedy but shaggy steeds, just as he was to pepper-and-salt suits and
large, soft black hats, each precisely like its predecessor. At the
conclusion of each of my early visits he would show me, through a
window, some dog or cat or bird that he kept in his back yard, for he
ranked pets among the consolations of life.

“Even then I was interested in him as a personality, for I had been
told how, as a boy, he used to carry a bag of papers and do similar
services for his father, a stately and irritable old judge, who
was so formidable that few people could see any fatherly pride and
affection in him. But as people used to say that the old judge could
see in the dark, there is no reason to think that he was blind to his
son’s exceptional character and promise, especially as he sent him to
college, which was then very unusual in the town. There, after a time,
the young fellow decided to go in for medicine. His reasons, which he
did not tell his father, were that law was a selfish and soulless
career, which contracted, instead of expanding, the mind, but that
medicine was an opportunity for both social service and, through its
sure and universal truth, an apprehension of the divine disposition of
affairs. This last belief he retained throughout his life, his spirit
and imagination never capitulating to the fatalism of his profession.

“The old judge died while the boy was in college, leaving an estate
composed chiefly of loans to poor people who could not pay, and rich
men who were slow to do so. Still, there was enough, with considerable
sacrifice on the part of the mother, to enable the young man to
complete his college years and go on to a metropolitan university
until he earned his degree in medicine. With this, for the time, most
exceptional training, and the approbation of his best professors, he
returned to the old town to enter upon general practice, so enamored of
his profession that he wondered why all men were not physicians.

“He soon won back the intimacy of a few close friends, but soon came,
also, to be disappointed in the force and genuineness of most of
his townspeople. On the other hand, his own carelessness in dress
and indifference to small formalities confirmed the general local
suspicion of any one who had been so long ‘away.’ He disconcerted
people, also, by his superior knowledge and directness, and his
unfailing attack upon whatever savored of weakness or insincerity.
Considering the family finances and his own lack of physical
ruggedness, he definitely put marriage aside from his calculations,
and when this, like most of his conclusions, became known, it further
discounted his social availability. Hence, his life soon became
restricted almost wholly to his home, his small circle of intimates,
and his profession.

“At his profession he continued to work tremendously, giving exhaustive
study to each case that came his way, inquiring into local epidemics
and sanitation, tirelessly investigating new ideas, and organizing his
entire technical knowledge. He cheerfully turned night into day when he
was needed, as he did later, when I knew him to get up in the middle of
the night to visit a seriously sick patient whom he had already seen
before and after breakfast, lunch, and dinner, and just before going
to bed. Birth and death loomed so large in his horizon that he was far
from ever considering what it was in his place to do. Self-forgetful as
he was, however, he made no sentimental sacrifices, but was the first
to introduce trained nurses into the town, and to urge, everywhere and
always, the need for the local hospital that came only long after. He
had, even, some dreams of preventive medicine.

“His father’s successor and the group of able lawyers, bankers, and
business men that controlled the town, looking upon all of this with
favor, determined him, although still young, to be one of themselves,
and made him health officer and physician to the county jail and
poor-farm. This confirmed his identification with his work until he
thought of it all the time, riding, walking, at his desk, at meals,
or lying awake at night. In this way, without relaxing his following
of the latest professional knowledge, he came to believe increasingly
in direct observation and experience, and acquired a discriminating
respect for the traditional lore of old men and women. Gradually,
more and more people began to see in him the true physician--working
for work’s sake, giving time and labor to the poor without reward, a
tireless guardian of the lives entrusted to him, a devoted champion and
example of all sanity and wholesomeness.

“Some of his traits, however, still delayed his complete success. He
was often restless, sometimes impatient in argument, and not always
considerate of his opponents. Once he even slapped a recalcitrant
patient. He was deeply humiliated over that, and candid and regretful
over his other defects, but he held that one could do but little by
special effort to change one’s character. He was, moreover, too learned
and quick-witted and plain-spoken to be a comfortable colleague for
most of his fellow practitioners. They felt obliged to look with
disfavor on his preference for simple medicaments and his emphasis on
hygiene, and they were publicly pained and privately severe concerning
his carelessness of appearances and his open pooh-poohing of what he
called ‘the hocus-pocus of the profession.’

“But after his marriage, which was an inconspicuous one, the softer
and finer sides of his nature took the permanent ascendency, and the
community, although it knew little of his family life, felt a new
gentleness behind the firmness of his growing power of command. It was
then that he began the practice, which he would have scorned earlier,
of carrying in his pockets cheerful and humorous quotations as means
for enlivening depressed patients. Thus, slowly but steadily, through
some conspicuous successes and many sure ones, his reputation became
more and more established, until, at about forty-five, he was accepted
by all as unquestionably the chief physician of the town.

“His frankness, however, by no means decreased as his fame advanced,
but people increasingly understood his eccentricities as they
increasingly honored his intellect and revered his character. He never
hesitated to say, for example, that his successes were due more to
experience and common sense than to any scientific knowledge. This
was, perhaps, a limitation of his location so far from the centres of
scholarship, but he would have followed reason rather than authority
anywhere. When the chief apothecary caught cold and died from a
consumption that the old doctor had long pronounced cured, he lamented
that this mistaken judgment had brought him more reputation than any
real cure he had ever accomplished, and he would sometimes regretfully
compare the tremendous exertions that had gone unrecognized in his
earliest practice with the late unreasoning praise of almost everything
he did--‘So hard it is,’ he would say, ‘to establish unpopular truth or
check popular error.’

“In spite of the fact that his penetration so far exceeded the ordinary
that his wit often led him beyond knowledge to track nature to her
lair, he used to grieve that so many things were hidden from him. He
trusted much to the wisdom of the natural course of things, watching
his cases and all their surrounding conditions closely, sweeping away
many of the cobwebs of current practice, and emphasizing chiefly
prescriptions of hygiene. Most diseases, he held, were either hopeless
or would cure themselves if people would be reasonably careful. After
his income became adequate for his modest needs he disliked to take
money for his services, preferring to get whatever he wanted from the
local tradesmen, and to care for them and their families without charge
on either side.

“Gradually, without decreasing his labors--I have heard that he
made fifty thousand professional calls--he became the community’s
philosopher and friend, as well as its physician. This was especially
the case after he came home, a citizen of the world, from a late
European journey, during which, apparently, he had ignored landscape,
architecture, and art in order to converse with all sorts and
conditions of men. As his earnestness and meditation increased with
age, and his utterance, always unexpected and pithy, grew ever more apt
and forcible, his sayings became widely quoted and accumulated into a
body of doctrine.

“He was by no means chiefly a critic, for, as he said, there were
always more unfortunate men needing encouragement than fortunate men
needing reproof. He maintained that a clean mind and busy hands were
proof against any tribulation, and that happiness lay not in the world,
but within the mind. ‘Whoever would live wisely,’ he would say, ‘must
know what he wants,’ and ‘Good humor bears half the ills of life.’

“It will be long, indeed, before his place and his friends forget ‘the
Old Doctor.’”




XVI

_Breakfasting with Portia_


“Probably few persons who are not professionally interested,” said
Professor Maturin, “realize how earnestly the schools of to-day are
endeavoring not only to conserve the proved excellences of traditional
knowledge, but also to provide new varieties of training that are
made imperative by present-day conditions. Hence the subjects in the
curriculum that appear fads to the fathers--nature study, manual
training, physical education, household science and art, music, and
the fine arts. Probably fewer yet know that American experiment in
one of these fields, especially, has been so notable that the British
Board of Education sent a special commission to study and to report to
Parliament on the teaching of domestic science or household economics
in the United States.

“It was the scientific and comprehensive character of this report, sent
me by a young friend, that first informed me of our distinction in
this difficult field. This same young person had previously overcome
my doubt as to the propriety of making such matters the subject of
academic study by learnedly quoting Xenophon’s Socrates, to the effect
that ‘domestic management is the name of an art, as that of healing or
of working in brass, or of building.’

“It should be understood, to be specific, that she, whom we may
call Portia, as a present student and a prospective propagandist
of domestic science, is about to receive her degree from that part
of one of our metropolitan universities which conducts research in
education and trains teachers both of the ancient liberal arts and
of such modern practical sciences as Portia’s own. After several
years devoted to the usual college subjects, her attention is now
concentrated upon educational principles and procedures in general, and
on the practice and presentation of her chosen subject in particular.
For a considerable period she has overflowed with such interesting
information concerning the chemistry and biology, the production and
manufacture, and the preparation and the assimilation of foods, that I
was more than delighted one day to be invited to partake of a breakfast
prepared by her and an associate, as one of the numerous practical
tests of knowledge and efficiency demanded by her curriculum.

“On my arrival, the Princess Ida who presided over this department
of the modern Athenaeum exhibited the equipment for the study and
practice of her science,--a technical library of many volumes;
elaborate collections of current reports and monographs; photographs,
charts, and records of investigations; especially equipped offices
and lecture and conference rooms,--and then presented me to the
half-dozen instructors under her direction. The laboratories for the
biological and chemical study of food materials were not unlike others
that I had seen; but those devoted especially to food preparation
uniquely combined the facilities of an elaborate club kitchen with the
scientific immaculateness of a surgery. The whole I was told, by the
way, was merely preparatory to a really perfect set of laboratories
which were building.

“A tile-topped laboratory table, with a skeleton gas-stove above, and
various drawers and cupboards beneath, stood in the centre of the room
for the demonstrator. About this, arranged on three sides, like a
banquet table, were perhaps thirty similar but connected desks at which
the students sat in trained-nurse uniform, facing their instructor.

“The right hand drawer of each desk contained such familiar small
utensils as knives, forks, and spoons, along with certain others that
would have seemed strange to our grandmothers; all carefully listed,
their condition and arrangement being subject to military inspection.
Each drawer at the left contained flours, sugar, spices, and condiments
in laboratory precision. The cupboard below each desk, closed by a
sliding shutter, contained measuring-cups, bowls, platters, pans,
and the like; each equipment being adequate for all ordinary cooking
processes. Around the sides of the room were stoves and ranges of
various designs heated by coal, charcoal, electricity, steam, gas, and
oil, not forgetting the professor’s Aladdin oven, or the peasant’s
hay-box cooker.

“Here were also immaculate porcelain sinks where uniformed maids
cleaned the larger utensils. Each student kept her own equipment
neat. Cases and frames held special implements and supplies drawn
from a nearby stock-room, or from library or files. Here and there
were bulletin boards displaying tables for computing dietaries, and
newspaper clippings concerning the cost of living. In one corner, as an
interesting reminder of the needs and possibilities of the simple life
in the midst of this intentionally ideal equipment, stood an outfit
that might be made and used in the remotest rural school--a cheap but
good oil stove, mounted on the zinc-covered top of a packing-box, that
included inexpensive examples of the fundamental implements, and had
an upturned fruit crate for a seat. This entire outfit cost about four
dollars.

“In one of these laboratories, students were making a comparative,
experimental study of breads; halting occasionally to hear from the
demonstrator and ponder the doctrine of the progression of batters
and doughs from corn bread, through waffles, to twin mountain
muffins--‘which are the beginning of cake.’ In another room, fruits
were being preserved separately and in combinations, and in all
mediums from distilled water to heavy syrups. In a third, the visitor
was given, as specimens of material for distribution, a mimeographed
recipe; a blue-print diagram of the conventional cuts of beef, lamb,
veal, and other meats; and a sheet of small photographs showing how
typical cuts of good meat should look.

“Meanwhile, Portia and Nerissa had been busy with the breakfast in
a separate kitchen and dining-room, as like as possible to those in
ordinary homes, yet planned with the best wisdom and taste of the
departmental staff. To this dining-room the pilgrim was now summoned
by his young friend, costumed as a maid and appearing slightly anxious,
for she and her ally were also to serve the meal that they had
prepared. The Princess Ida’s premier acted as hostess, and a masculine
professor and a feminine instructor joined to make a party, typical,
the hostess announced, of sedentary men and of moderately active
women--a statement that apprised me of the fact that I was considered
not merely as a guest, but also as scientific data. The simple goodness
of the linen and china, however, was only that of the discriminating
home, and the growing plant on the table was there, I was told, for
purely aesthetic reasons.

“But superior knowledge and skill entered with the food--stewed prunes
and apricots, astonishing in size, delicious in flavor. Although
I am unaccustomed to breakfasting at noon, and although years of
housekeeping have been unable to blot out the remembrance of previous
prunes, I fell to with avidity. My memory of the ensuing conversation
is somewhat mingled with later talks with Portia, but then or
afterward, I learned that our total consumption of this dish was only
about four ounces, at a cost of approximately three cents for four
persons. A home, of course, must also count the cost of all the food
prepared, but not consumed.

“The delectable quality of the cereal that followed was due, along with
its superior digestibility, I was informed, to its first having been
briefly boiled in order to open the grains, by bursting, to the action
of the gentler after-cooking. The cost of cereal, I was reminded, was
small when compared with that of its accompaniments. We ate one cent’s
worth of cereal, but the sugar upon it cost an equal amount, and the
cream five times as much. But the professor justified the combination
because of the constituent elements of the three; cream being largely
fat, sugar largely carbon, cereal largely protein.

“When later I asked Portia what this protein was, she replied in a sort
of chant, as though she were assisting at some mystic rite: ‘Next to
water, protein is the largest ingredient in the human body, forming
about eighteen per cent. It is similar to the white of egg, the lean
of meat, the curd of milk, and the gluten of wheat.’ This and other
intimations gave me to understand that protein is the _sine qua non_ of
dietetics.

“As we enjoyed the admirable omelet which followed--eight ounces: one
of proteid, one of fat, one-half ounce of carbo-hydrate; cost ten
cents for four--the professor informed me that the nutritive value of
food is measured by the heat it gives off in combustion, the unit of
computation being the calorie, or the amount of heat which would raise
one pound of water four degrees Fahrenheit. Protein and carbo-hydrate
yield eighteen hundred to the pound, fats about four thousand. The
necessary number of calories per day for a professional man is
somewhere between the thirty-two hundred averaged by American and the
thirty-three hundred averaged by Japanese university professors. The
standard is placed at twenty-seven hundred by the special agent in
charge of the United States Department of Agriculture’s investigations
in nutrition. Hard muscular labor requires half as much again. These
figures are the result of measurements, by means of a so-called
respiratory calorimeter, of the entire receipts and expenditures of
the human body, under varying conditions and for periods of from
three to twelve days. These and similar experiments are described in
bulletins published and distributed without charge by the Department of
Agriculture. Recent experiments by other investigators make the ideal
number of calories considerably less.

“Toasted rolls and drip coffee ended our meal; the former weighed
four ounces, two-thirds carbo-hydrate, the remainder equally proteid
and fat; the ingredients costing only two cents, or as much as the
butter used on them. Throughout, of course, no estimate was made of
the cost of labor, an element which, together with rent or interest
on equipment, usually more than equals the cost of food. Fuel costs,
approximately, one-tenth of this amount.

“Coffee was assigned no nutritive value in the tabular statement of our
breakfast that Portia worked out and brought me some days later. But
as a mild stimulant, it does more good than harm, very much less harm
than tea, which, when not freshly made, contains chemicals difficult of
digestion. The coffee we four enjoyed cost approximately three cents.

“When Portia told me that she was also to give a luncheon, with soup,
entrée, salad, and a sweet, I fear that I was too precipitate in my
commendation of her work, my prophecies for her future, and in implying
my willingness again to serve the cause of science. I tried my best,
however, to be discreet, for I am very anxious to be invited again,
and I was rather pleased at my adroitness in presenting her with an
individually bound volume of Ruskin, with the red silk marker at that
page of ‘The Ethics of the Dust’ which says of cooking:

“‘It means the knowledge of Medea and of Circe and of Calypso and of
Helen and of Rebekah and of the Queen of Sheba. It means the knowledge
of all herbs and fruits and balms and spices; and of all that is
healing and sweet in fields and groves, and savory in meats; it means
carefulness and inventiveness and watchfulness and willingness and
readiness of appliance; it means the economy of your great-grandmothers
and the science of modern chemists; it means English thoroughness and
French art and Arabian hospitality; and it means, in fine, that you are
to be perfectly and always “ladies”--“loaf-givers;” and, as you are to
see, imperatively, that everybody has something pretty to put on, so
you are to see, yet more imperatively, that everybody has something
nice to eat.’”




XVII

_Summer Science_


“My young friend, Portia,” said Professor Maturin, “was plainly dubious
when I suggested making a week-end visit to the scientific colony
where she planned to spend the summer doing research work in biology.
She did not believe that I would be interested in observing a hundred
college professors and students listening to lectures and looking
through microscopes. She implied that occasional visitors were felt, by
their holiday moods, somewhat to distract the attention of the serious
workers. And, finally, she suggested that I was perhaps temperamentally
unsuited to lead the very simple life that prevailed, the place being
as unlike as possible to the typical summer resort. However, when I
pleaded my sympathetic interest in all things human, modestly called
attention to my reputation for discretion, and gently reminded her
that I had proved an acceptable and even welcome guest among the peace
agitators of Lake Placid, the literati of Onteora, and the artists of
Cornish, she ceased to protest. I might do as I liked; she, of course,
would be glad to see me.

“So it was that I found myself, one calm Saturday evening, en route
for her ‘Marine Biological Laboratory.’ During my sail along the Sound
I found myself amusedly wondering whether Portia’s professors would
prove to be anything like the important mate who gave so many more and
so much louder orders than were necessary, in warping the boat from
the dock. I was pleased to find them rather more like the lights that
later appeared along the shore--some clear and steady, some brilliant
but intermittent, others a trifle spectacular in coloring, all plainly
enjoying a comfortable sense of their importance to the community;
but all of them interesting, and some performing services really
indispensable to human progress.

“The realization of high thinking and, presumably, plain living began
with a six o’clock landing next morning and the writer’s earliest
breakfast in years, watching, meanwhile, coming events cast their
shadows before in the person of a slender spectacled gentleman in
blue, who slowly consumed one roll and a cup of frequently diluted
coffee, while he rapidly assimilated the contents of a thin, black,
scientific-looking volume with round corners and red edges.

“Within an hour, on a smaller steamer, we sighted the red brick,
yellow shingle, and green slate buildings of a station of the United
States Fish Commission. It was because of this station, devoted to
everything that affects our fisheries, and of its especial facilities
for collecting and preserving marine life, that a group of college
scientists established the biological laboratory by its side, some
twenty years ago. Their leader was still the director, and although
most of the administrative details were now delegated to younger
men, he was still regularly in residence, in a cottage erected by
his appreciative colleagues to replace one destroyed by fire, and
surrounded by hundreds of carefully reared pigeons, which for years he
had made the basis of minute studies in heredity, with the aid of two
Japanese artists, who painstakingly recorded the contour and coloring
of every peculiar bird.

“The slow and careful entrance of the steamer into the landlocked
harbor, through passages so tortuous as to make a local pilot often
necessary, indicated the peculiar geographical character of the
locality. So great has been the sea’s erosion that it is difficult to
say whether the rocky shore line most resembled the margin of a cake
at which youthful teeth had been at work, or the end of a flag whipped
into tatters by the wind. It is this intricate character of the region
that makes it the congenial home of many sea creatures elsewhere
obtainable only with difficulty.

“Portia met me at the pier, explaining her somewhat tempered summer
bloom by the fact that she was spending the sunniest hours of the
day indoors in the laboratory. She conducted me through a typical,
old-time New England village of perhaps five hundred inhabitants,
through streets almost as devious as the waterways, and similarly
appropriated by science. Next to the village church, which displayed
the usual placard that the ladies of the congregation were about to
hold a fair where refreshments and a large assortment of aprons might
be had, the village store made the unusual announcement that pure
paraffin and proof alcohol were always on hand, and that microscopes
with all attachments might be ordered. This emporium was even the
subject of a biological joke, which Portia kindly explained to me: ‘Why
was Portrope’s shop like an amoeba?’ ‘Because it was a single cell with
all the functions.’ This comforted me with the feeling that even if the
scientists did take themselves seriously, they yet preserved the saving
grace of humor.

“I was led to the most remarkable lodgings that I have ever occupied,
kept by a publisher’s reader, who had elected to spend her summer in
this way for the sake of variety. I am convinced that she got it, or
at any rate, that she gave it. Her furnishings were of the simplest,
and the strangest, having been leased from the amoeba at ten per
cent of their cost for each month of use--an arrangement which, like
the furnishings, would scarcely have been acceptable to any but an
imagination that had been subjected to the severest strains.

“The roof also leaked, but in such a desultory fashion that it was
about the only thing in the place that impressed me as free from the
influence of scientific efficiency. But the house was directly on the
harbor, my room overlooking that and the laboratory, which occupied a
compound next to the commission. Portia departing to finish a drawing
before the bathing hour, I was left to observe with interest, at a
window opposite, an assiduous young man intently bent over his work,
which, Portia informed me later, was a study of the coagulation of
lobster’s blood. Subsequent observation of a few of his neighbors
convinced me that at least some of the investigators were not
unacquainted with academic leisure. Down by the shore an officer of our
regular army nurses was living in a specimen hospital tent, for the
purpose of testing the capabilities of its construction, texture, and
color for service in the field.

“The taste of the publisher’s reader was equal if not superior to her
imagination. If the house reminded me that she was in the habit of
receiving many strange things, the food was proof that her standard of
acceptance was very high. Steamed clams, real chicken, and delicious
vegetables, where they must have been by no means easy to procure;
lobster in a chafing-dish, fruit sherbet, and thoroughly sophisticated
coffee, formed our Sunday dinner. The conversation was no less
interesting, my opposite at table being a distinguished biological
painter. It had never previously occurred to me that of course there
must be such. Usually busied in evoking the outward form and semblance
of prehistoric creatures from their remains in museums, he was here
for semi-recreation, painting marine life from the aquaria of the
Fish Commission. I was later presented to the object of his current
admiration, a creature with the anatomy of a frying-pan and the manners
of the Bowery, popularly known as a ‘stingray’ because of a dangerous
weapon in its tail. His next sitter was to be a rare specimen of
parasite fish, which, although nearly two feet long, was deriving all
its locomotion about the tank from a much-embarrassed but helpless
shark, to the under side of which it was complacently attached by means
of a suction arrangement on the top of its head.

“Portia, like most of the other students, had lodgings in a private
house in the village, there being not more than half a dozen cottages
exclusively devoted to summer guests. She took her meals at the
laboratory mess, where the plain but adequate food was flavored with
abundant talk of distribution, variation, regeneration, mutation, and
the dynamics of protoplasm. Having once fixed these catchwords in mind,
I rapidly acquired the local language, and could shortly ask simple
questions without difficulty.

“In addition to the long, low mess hall, the laboratory occupied three
other square, two-story buildings of gray shingle, set off by dark
green paint. The largest, with several wings, contained class-rooms
and laboratories for two of the three regular courses of instruction
in physiology, morphology, and embryology. On the upper floor was an
excellent technical library with Agassiz’s motto, ‘Study nature, not
books.’ Around the sides of both floors and in the other buildings were
individual working rooms, in which the more advanced investigators
sentenced themselves to solitary confinement during the major part
of each day. These rooms and the students’ tables in the several
larger rooms were at the disposal of the colleges from whose annual
contributions most of the working funds of the laboratory are derived.

“During the six weeks of regular class instruction in July and August,
there are two or more public evening lectures each week, in which
visiting scholars present the more generally interesting aspects of
their special fields of study. I did not share Portia’s enthusiastic
anticipation of the coming of a lecturer who had just returned from
hunting a particular variety of snail in the South Sea Islands, but
the lecture changed my apprehension to appreciation, and, finally, to
admiration.

“Other lectures dealt quite as attractively with the development of
habits among birds, the detection of the minute organisms that cause
many human diseases, the study of heredity in families of rabbits
and guinea-pigs, and the creation of new forms of plant life. Every
considerable investigation of which I heard had definite relation
to some generalization that was capable of practical application--a
striking contrast to similar work in certain other sciences.

“Portia’s problem, which I was interested to find important enough to
deserve a private room, was the regeneration of planarians, minute
marine parasites which have the power, when divided, of developing
new heads or tails. Her endeavor was, by means of a microscope,
magnifying some twelve hundred times, to observe and trace the earliest
differentiation of the cells that were to form the several new organs.
Of the hundred or more students in residence, about half of them
young women, perhaps one-half were carrying on similar studies, of
varying degrees of difficulty. Among these were college professors and
instructors who were conducting researches that had extended over many
years. The volumes of the laboratory’s monthly publication, containing
records of the processes and results of such work, made more than
ordinarily interesting reading, even for the layman.

“The recreations of the place were as interesting as its labors. The
social life was that of a highly selected college community, where
everybody knows everybody else and his wife, and finds them well
worth knowing; and everywhere, always, there rose and fell a tide of
excellent talk.

“In short, I had so good a time that I visited Portia not three days,
but ten, and then departed with a regret that was not dispelled even
when she formally approved my conduct by inviting me to come again. She
was so smiling and sympathetic at the pier that I found myself asking a
question that had repeatedly suggested itself, but which had as often
been spontaneously repressed.

“What, if any, was the definite or practical value of her summer’s
work, as compared with that which she had previously been doing in the
field of domestic science? That, she replied, was for me to determine.
Perhaps, when I thought it all over, some such bearing would occur to
me. I was afraid that she was going to be disappointed in me, after
all, and hastened to change the subject by inquiring why, since the
afternoon was so fine, she was wearing her long oilskin coat and
sou’wester hat. It was certainly a becoming costume, although it too
much concealed her trim figure--her color was now all that could be
desired.

“‘Oh, I don’t work in the laboratory all of the time,’ she answered.
‘I--that is, we--are going sailing.’ Just at that moment the
importunate mate’s ‘All aboard’ precluded further leave-taking. But as
I watched her from the deck of the receding steamer, after a farewell
wave of the hand, turn expectantly toward a jaunty sail-boat that was
skimming in the direction of the pier under the guidance of one of the
younger professors, I began to have glimmerings of at least one answer
to my question.”




XVIII

_Measuring the Mind_


When Professor Maturin discovered that his young friend Portia had
become a student of psychology, he expressed no surprise, having
learned where she was concerned to expect the unexpected. But he did
voice his impression that the science was one that had, as yet, but
an imperfect appreciation of the feminine mind. “Precisely,” replied
Portia; “listen to this,” and opening one of her note-books, she
read: “Our modern knowledge of woman represents her as primitive,
conservative, nearer the savage than man. She is lighter, weaker,
slower, less dexterous, less accurate, less individual. She is more
nervous, more emotional, more superstitious, and more often insane.
In short, her lack of accomplishment is due not to subjection, but to
fundamental inferiority.”

“Now that,” concluded Portia, “was undoubtedly written by a man, and
is therefore probably as mistaken as what men have usually written
about women in novels and poems. At any rate, I intend to see for
myself.” Professor Maturin immediately commended her intention, and
subsequently followed her progress with an interest which, after a
time, she rewarded by an invitation to visit the laboratory where she
was working. It was not long, by the way, before she discovered that,
although the particular statements of the German scientist she had
quoted were in the main correct, an obsession of the Kaiser’s “church,
children, cooking, and clothes” doctrine had made him ignore equally
striking facts on the other side. Her other discoveries shall be given
in Professor Maturin’s own words. “As we started on our expedition
she read me a counter quotation, from an even more famous authority:
‘Woman is more observant, more assimilative, more sympathetic, more
intuitional, more aesthetic, and more moral than man. She is more
typical of the race and nearer the superman of the future. Man in
comparison is senile, if not decadent.’

“My burst of admiration for a science that could solve the same
problem in such opposite ways, was checked by Portia’s remarking that
she attributed scarcely more importance to the latter than to the
former statement. She was quite in accord with the directors of her
laboratory, in considering much of what calls itself psychology to
be based on philosophic deduction or popular generalization, rather
than on scientific observation and experiment. As a matter of fact,
scientific psychology, as a development of the present generation,
was just beginning to find its accumulated facts sufficient for any
generalization. This statement gave me a sense of entering a theatre
just as the curtain was going up.

“After a glimpse at the general arrangement of the department’s score
or more of rooms, Portia proceeded to lead me systematically through
the suite devoted to physiological psychology. Concerning the sense
of smell, little seemed to be known, except that it is sufficiently
sensitive to detect a thimbleful of odorous gas diffused through a very
large room. Not much more is known concerning taste, except that it can
be stimulated electrically, as smell cannot be, and that sweet and sour
are distinguished chiefly by the tip of the tongue; bitter and salt by
the back.

“But discoveries in physics have made possible extensive studies of
sound sensation. The average ear has a compass for sounds of from
twenty-eight vibrations a second to twenty-two thousand, and can detect
differences caused by a variation of sixty. The figures for sight are
even more surprising. The sensation of red is caused by rays of light
which vibrate from four hundred and forty to four hundred and seventy
billion times a second. At this stage of my observations, I abandoned
my memory for a pencil and note-book. Increasingly rapid vibrations
produce the other colors, up to violet, which is caused by about seven
hundred and twenty-two billions.

“It is not surprising, therefore, that the sense of sight displays
considerable inertia. It takes a perceptible time for the eye to see
what is before it, and its images persist after the object is removed
or the eye is closed. Such after-images are at times like the object,
but show its complementary color if the sense is fatigued. This last
fact is said to be taken advantage of by department-store salesmen,
who change fabrics of which their customers are wearied for others
complementary in color. Pressure and temperature are felt only at
certain spots on the body, very close together, but quite unevenly
distributed. The forehead and the back, for example, are more sensitive
to cold than to heat. Some spots are sensitive to heat or cold alone,
seeming to indicate separate sets of nerves for these sensations.

“The lower limits of any sensation may be determined by gradually
diminishing a stimulus until its effect is not noted, or by increasing
a smaller stimulus until a sensation is produced. Delicacy of
perception is measured by noting the smallest increase or decrease of
stimulus needed to produce a change in sensation. Some persons can
distinguish, by touch, a difference of half an ounce in a pound weight.
Measured by the distance apart at which the points of a divider can
be separately felt, the cheek is but half as sensitive as the finger,
the finger but half as sensitive as the tongue. Hence, it is probably
in order to touch as well as to taste that infants carry everything to
the mouth. The direction of sounds is determined by the difference in
the relative intensity of the sensation in the two ears; the position
of the body, when the eyes are closed, is somehow felt by means of
semi-circular canals in the ear. Measured by moving a candle away
from an object until its shadow seems the same as that produced by a
fixed candle, or by rotating disks bearing black lines on white, the
eye can distinguish a difference of one one-hundredth in a quantity
of light. Judging distance by sight is said to involve at least ten
separate operations of perception and judgment, vision being really
mental interpretation, based on association and memory as well as
on sensation. Hence, errors in visual perception are so common that
painters, sculptors, and architects always take them into account.
Estimates of distance with one eye alone are usually inaccurate;
vertical seem longer than horizontal distances. The size of small
objects and the speed of larger ones are usually underestimated; the
speed of small bodies and the size of larger ones, exaggerated. Yet, in
judgment of space, sight is more accurate than touch.

“The most interesting rooms of this series were those devoted to
measuring the time of nervous and mental processes, by means of
complicated and delicate machinery, electrical for the most part,
and arranged so as to cause certain sense impressions, and to record
the time between these and a response in some form of motion.
Each experiment is repeated many times, with the same person, and
with many persons, in order to eliminate errors due to inertia of
after-impressions, to expectation or practice, to surprise or fatigue.
In even so simple a procedure as pressing an electric button with
one hand on feeling a touch on the other, nearly a dozen distinct
elements were considered--stimulus of the sense organ, conduction
through nerve and through brain, reception and transformation of the
impulse, reconduction through brain and through nerve, and, finally,
muscular action. The speed of nerve transmission being known as from
one hundred and fifty to two hundred feet a second, it is possible to
deduce the approximate rate of mental reception and action. It is not
flattering to learn that electricity is about one thousand times as
quick. The total reaction from hand to hand occupies from one-tenth
to one-fifth of a second; the ear has approximately the same rate of
action; the eye is about one-fourth slower. The mind’s interpretation
of sensation averages about one-twenty-fifth of a second; its
determination to act, a shade less.

“It takes less time to perceive color and form than letters or words,
and all of these differ among themselves. The number three seems a sort
of natural unit, it being almost as easy to perceive three objects
at once, as one; it is much harder to perceive four. The imaginative
reproduction of an image requires about one-fourth of a second; the
association of abstract ideas, about three times as long--all according
to the previous alteration or multiplication of the six hundred million
or more brain cells which are the average individual’s stock in trade.

“The numerical records of all such experiments are transformed
graphically into diagrams, whose bases represent the number of
experiments, and whose heights represent the varying accomplishment.
Such surfaces of frequency, as they are called, show at a glance
the entire performance of the trait studied, and are therefore much
superior to the ordinary method of averages. The intellectual average
of a town that contained a university and an insane asylum would be
about that of a town that had neither. A diagram, however, would show
not only the average, but the much more significant distribution.
Attention is also paid to the ‘mode,’ or measure that occurs most
frequently, and to the ‘median,’ or record above and below which half
of the measurements lie. Then, by calculating the average deviation
from the average, and certain similar ratios, it is possible finally
to obtain a small group of figures which contain the essence of the
entire distribution. This, in turn, makes possible the measurement and
the comparison not only of particular mental functions, but of the
characteristic ability of individuals and of groups. In this way, for
example, it has been found that mental activities vary in much the same
manner as do the functions of most of the natural organs that have been
measured by biologists, anthropologists, and physicians. In general,
two-thirds of all mental performances lie within the middle third of
ability. Average efficiency is very near to the most common, and both
lie about half-way between the two extremes.

“Perhaps the most striking result of such study is the discovery, by
means of a large number of measurements, that mental functions are
much more independent of one another than is usually thought, and that
a change in one function alters another only so far as the two have
identical elements. There is, for example, only a slight correlation
between remembering numbers and remembering words, and no perceptible
relation between perception of time and perception of rhythm, or
between sense perception in general and memory. Judged from the grades
given by instructors to several thousand school and college students,
the natural sciences are closer to Latin, in the kind of ability they
require, than they are to mathematics. Algebra and geometry are almost
as different from one another as mathematics in general are from
non-mathematical subjects.

“Such facts certainly seemed to warrant the conclusions of the
professor to whose guidance Portia now consigned me: ‘The mind is not
a functional unit, nor even a collection of general faculties which
work irrespective of particular material. It is rather a multitude of
separate functions, each closely related to only a few of the others,
and to most in so slight a degree as to elude measurement. It is
impossible to infer success in one field from success in another, or
success in an entire subject from success in a part of it. To estimate
the general ability of any individual requires the separate measurement
of traits sufficiently numerous and well-chosen to represent fairly all
of his capacities. By means of such specific measurements, however, we
can determine pretty definitely an individual’s capability for any of
the highly specialized activities, such as music or painting.’

“The rooms devoted to the study of genetic psychology, or mental
development, contained much interesting data concerning the mental
life of children, collected usually through very simple tests, such as
estimating the size of geometrical figures, the length of lines, or
the duration of sounds; arranging in graduation a series of weights,
or the shades of a color; or recalling series of related or unrelated
letters or words. While the material thus obtained seems to indicate
the existence of certain general laws of mental growth, it is not yet
considered sufficient to establish them. The implications are that the
masculine mind is slightly more variable, the feminine slightly better
in perception; and that the relation between early and later ability is
one not of antagonism, but of resemblance.

“I wished that I might linger over the studies of rapidity of
movement, tested by tapping; and of precision, tested by drawing
lines in a narrow, intricate path, or by tapping in a small circle
without touching the sides; and I would gladly have spent a day
examining the ingenious contrivances for recording and measuring the
attention demanded and the emotions aroused by different sorts of
reading. But our time was growing so short that I was hurried on,
after only a glimpse at a mass of material that would have delighted
or distressed--I had not time to learn which--the heart of a spelling
reformer--the records of the spelling of thirty-three thousand
children! In this connection the professor remarked that his own
experiments had convinced him that good spelling depended not on memory
or on observation in general, but upon a certain specific ability to
notice small differences in words, by means of sight, hearing, or, in
the case of the blind, through touch.

“In the next, so-called ‘heredity room’ were records showing that
children of the same parents are slightly more like one another than
they are like the average, in height, color of eyes and hair, and in
all the mental traits that have been studied in this connection. The
physical traits of parents tend to alternate, their mental traits to
blend, among their children. Eminent men are almost always found to
have near relatives of eminence. Family resemblances are most marked in
traits, like musical ability, that are least affected by environment.
Here, too, were the life histories of many twins, showing that those
closely alike at birth and in early rearing usually remained so in
spite of later changes in environment; and that those unlike at birth
remained so in spite of identity of nurture. From such and similar
facts the department drew the conclusions that nature predominates
greatly over nurture, that inheritance is specialized rather than
general, and from the original nature of the parents rather than from
acquired traits.

“Individuals who are subjected to the influence of a particular
environment are usually so much more influenced by the forces that
select them for that environment, that accurate knowledge in this
field is obtainable only with difficulty. The fact, for example, that
most Congressmen are college graduates is probably due not so much
to their education as to their early giving evidence of ability that
demanded such training. In the words of the professor: ‘The factor of
selection is commonly neglected, the influence of environment commonly
overestimated. Environment does not create, but merely selects and
stimulates natural abilities. About all that education can do is
to supply facilities for and remove obstacles to the growth of the
brain, encourage desirable activities by making them pleasurable, and
inhibit their opposites by making them uncomfortable. Mental hygiene,
opportunity, and incentive are the foundations of the teacher’s
Blackstone.’

“I was prepared to be impressed most of all by what Portia called the
‘human-nature room,’ for here were printed records of many studies
based on answers to widely circulated ‘questionnaires.’ From one set
it was deduced that half of us have favorite sounds, open vowels and
liquid consonants leading; one-fourth are fond of particular words,
‘murmur’ being the choice of the majority; most people are fond of
particular names, ‘Helen’ being the prime favorite. Similar records
showed that women read more than men, but reach the period of maximum
reading sooner, the greatest reading age being about twenty, the
average amount small after thirty-five, most people reading for
emotional rather than intellectual reasons. Yet others indicated that
muscular power increases and attention decreases in summer, the mind
being at its best from December until April.

“I was concluding that here was a very mine of richness for the
novelist, when the professor remarked: ‘We attribute small importance
to this sort of thing. Conclusions based on reports from artificially
selected and incompetent observers and combined in an unscientific
manner have no general validity. Only direct expert observation of
representative cases, and accurate statistical study of all the factors
involved, can bring reliable results. We may base our educational
ideals on philosophic or popular theories, but our study of the nature
of mind and the ways of affecting it, to be at all valuable, must be
rigidly scientific.’

“Well, I had learned enough and to spare without these suggestive, if
inaccurate, observations of general human nature, and without even
looking into certain rooms, where zoölogists and psychologists united
in studying the development of mind in the animal world.

“‘I presume,’ I remarked to Portia as we left the building, ‘that when
you come to consider suitors for your daughters, you will inquire into
not their social and financial standing, but their personal equations
of perception and motor-activity, and request statistics concerning
the central tendency and variability of each of their mental and moral
traits?’ ‘Undoubtedly,’ she replied, ‘and I should want to know similar
facts for their parents, and also the details of their reaction to
humidity and to heat.’

“‘Shall you require similar data concerning the prospective father of
those daughters?’ I asked. ‘Perhaps,’ she concluded; ‘but considering
the present undeveloped state of the science, I should insist on
conducting those investigations myself. Just now I have no time for
such experiments. I must to a lecture. Good-bye.’

“Thus Portia left me to proceed to my lunch and to cogitate alone, a
more confirmed perfectibilian than ever, marvelling at the achievement
of this generation, and half prepared to accept as true an inscription
that I had seen in the last room we visited: ‘Psychology has a message
to the world, richer and more original than that of the Renaissance.’”




XIX

_The Club of the Bachelor Maids_


Professor Maturin told me that he was convinced, after very brief
cogitation, that no one but his young friend Portia could have caused
him to receive the impressively simple card which lay before him,
reading: “The Pleasure of your Company is requested at the First Annual
Gentlemen’s Day at the Club of the Bachelor Maids.” Therefore, before
dispatching his acknowledgment to the house committee, he wrote to
Portia that he should be more than happy to accept the invitation if
she would be good enough to accompany him and see him safely through.
To this she acceded with a promptness that implied her anticipation of
the suggestion; and so the designated afternoon found them entering the
portal together. I quote the account of his experiences as exactly as I
can remember it.

“The house, which had been remodelled out of two dwellings in the
fifties near the avenue, was very interestingly although simply
furnished, in colonial fashion for the most part. There was a spacious
public room with tapestried walls and wicker furniture, a library and
a reading-room with home-like fireplaces, and an extensive lunch and
dinner-room in mahogany and cream. I understood that there were also
Turkish baths in the basement, and a sun parlor and a garden on the
roof, but these were not shown.

“When I turned my attention from the furnishings to the company which
had assembled in the larger rooms, I realized the truth of a recent
observation that our American women are steadily improving in personal
appearance. There was never, to be sure, any crying need for such
improvement. Yet, after examining the portraits of early American
women by Copley, West, and Stuart, hung in the dinner-room, or the
loan collection of Malbone and Staigg miniatures in the library, it
was impossible not to be forcibly struck by the living faces about
them. Whether due to the operation of natural selection or to our
national crossing of races, to modern intellectual advancement or
to contemporary social emphasis on better air, food, and exercise,
I cannot say. But the superiority of the modern women in symmetry
and grace, delicacy and modulation of coloring, and in variety and
individuality of expression, was beyond question. The splendid carriage
of many of the guests and their refined voices, Mr. Henry James to the
contrary notwithstanding, were a delight at the moment, and have been a
pleasant memory ever since.

“Portia was so much pleased at my pleasure, that she was quite
willingly drawn to a recess whence I could look and where she could
elucidate without interruption. There she told me what she could
concerning the possessors of such aesthetic mouths, lustrous eyes, and
autumn-tinted hair as especially fascinated my gaze.

“I ventured also to inquire about the wearers of particular gowns, for
even my masculine eye could perceive, here and there, certain rare
harmonies of costume with appearance and bearing, and I was flattered
to be told of almost every person who thus attracted my attention that
she was generally thought to be especially interesting. Whereupon
I jotted down in my pilgrim’s scrip the observation that, in spite
of fashion, dress may yet sometimes become a subtle expression of
personality. Portia, indeed, told me that fashion troubled some of
these ladies so little that one of them had made an aphorism to the
effect that ‘Individual women are seldom in fashion; they are usually
in advance of it.’ Which saying I remembered instead of my own.

“This phrase and its maker, a gifted designer of jewelry, deflected
our conversation to the subject of occupations, it being a
qualification for membership in the club that ‘one must be somebody
or do something for one’s self,’ as Portia put it; a requirement more
strictly enforced than that of the celibacy implied by the name of
the organization. As one member and another appeared or passed with
her guests, Portia singled out for me the architect and the decorator
who had planned and furnished the house, and then the florist who
had arranged the decorations, and the caterer who had provided the
unique refreshments of the day. There were also numerous librarians
and settlement workers, two successful real estate operators, and
the manager of an important branch of the office work of a huge life
insurance company. One handsome, middle-aged woman, that I took to be
one of the philanthropic patrons who had made the club’s equipment
possible, Portia singled out as a practitioner of what struck me as
the most interesting profession of all--a department-store critic. It
was her function to make a daily survey of every part of one of our
immense emporiums in order, from her observation, her knowledge of
other shops, and of their patrons’ tastes, to make suggestions for
improvements in stock, display, or service. I saw also a number of
artists and authors, reviewers and publishers’ readers. In one of the
rooms an excellent programme was being rendered by several members
representative of a musical group, which alternated with similar
literary, artistic, and dramatic coteries, in providing entertainment
for a series of weekly club evenings throughout the winter.

“Upon my making particular inquiry concerning such of the club’s
members as were graduates of our colleges for women, Portia for a
time devoted her attention to representatives of that class. A number
of these, naturally enough, were college instructors. Several were
physicians and hospital officials; one, an attorney, was probation
officer in a juvenile court; two were on the editorial staff of
newspapers. Many found regular employment in religious or philanthropic
enterprises; only one was in business--as assistant to the secretary of
a large electrical company.

“When I was unoriginal enough to ask the conventional question
concerning the general attitude of college women toward marriage,
Portia gave what I instantly recognized as the only possible answer,
inconclusive as it was: the college woman was as yet too recent a
phenomenon for any generalization about her to be safe. The particular
question of her attitude to marriage could be solved only by the
well-nigh impossible process of comparing equal groups of college and
non-college women of the same social kind. Such indications as there
were showed no great differences, except perhaps that college women
were likely to marry somewhat later.

“Indeed, I found that the club was intended, for one thing, to be a
sort of outpost for studying and, if need be, aiding the solution
of just such problems in the economic and social life of women,
‘especially of such as would go a-careering,’ in the words of the
phrase-maker. Among the many announcements on a bulletin board, I saw
that a well-known litterateur--or should one say litteratrice?--was
to speak on Madame de Staël, George Sand, and Mrs. Browning; a
philanthropist on Madame Roland and the Countess Schimmelmann; a
psychologist on Marie Bashkirtseff and Mary MacLean. And there
were lists of conferences on physiology and hygiene, sociology and
economics, and religion and philanthropy, in addition to announcements
of the weekly entertainments already mentioned.

“Another bulletin bore an equal number of announcements of all sorts of
outside recreations, from the opera and selected theatres to golf and
Adirondack camps.

“In all of its activities the organization displayed not only the same
energy but also the same breadth of view. The cant of sentimentality
and the anti-cant of grievance were alike conspicuously absent.
The club picture gallery included Rossetti’s ‘Blessed Damozel’ and
Alma-Tadema’s ‘Cleopatra,’ as well as portraits of Susan B. Anthony and
the Countess of Warwick. Its library contained social studies as unlike
as Aristophanes’ ‘Ladies in Parliament’ and Mary Wollstonecraft’s
‘Vindication of the Rights of Women;’ and philosophic deductions as
opposed as Comte’s ‘Worship of Women’ and Schopenhauer’s ‘Woman as
Insufficient Reason.’ The only piece of militant feminism anywhere to
be seen was one of a series of inscriptions on oaken panels:

  _Women have risen to high excellence
  In every art whereto they give their care._

On closer inspection, I found this to be a quotation from Ariosto.
Beside it was an inscription from Herbert Spencer which read: ‘If
women comprehended all that is contained in the domestic sphere, they
would ask no other.’ That the club realized the humorous as well as
the serious suggestion of such juxtaposition was proved by one of the
mantelpieces, where rested side by side an effigy of Egypt’s great
queen Hatasu, and a fragment of a Roman matron’s epitaph, reading, ‘She
stayed at home and span.’

“When I asked Portia to what conclusions, if any, her club life had led
her, she confessed to only a few, and those very tentative. As compared
with the married women of her acquaintance whose cultivation was
equal to that of her fellow club members, most of the latter appeared
over-serious, self-distrustful, or inconsistent. A few seemed to find
full activity and satisfaction in careers for which they obviously
possessed decided gifts. But the majority, after a certain eagerness
for experience and self-realization had become satisfied, seemed to be
but half-heartedly filling in their time while anticipating or desiring
something else. This attitude, together with the census statistics,
appeared to indicate that the chief career for the great majority of
women was still through marriage. Whether it was becoming less so for
the kind of women the club comprised, and if this were the case, what
was the alternative--these were among the questions upon which the
organization held itself open to conviction.

“For herself, Portia was happy still to be in the mood of acquisition:
there were many things that she was eager to learn and to experience
before it became time to inquire what she was going to be. As yet she
had got no further than realizing that, while being a bachelor woman
seemed to have obvious limitations, it was surely extremely pleasant to
be a bachelor maid.

“I very honestly replied that, considering her youth and her
opportunities, I would not have her feel differently--certainly not at
present.”




XX

_A Small College_


Professor Maturin has always questioned the somewhat popular belief
that the small college, once so important, is about to disappear
between the portentously rumbling upper and nether millstones of the
universities and the public schools. He was therefore more than glad to
accept, in the form of an invitation to visit a professorial friend at
a country college, an opportunity to see for himself.

During two hundred express-train miles away from the metropolis, and
twenty more deliberate ones away from the main line, he thought a
good deal about the matter, not without regret that the German ideal
of specialized scholarship should completely overcome the English
ideal of general culture. After the professor’s cordial greetings,
conversation at once turned to this topic. The professor, however, was
so unapprehensive that he claimed attention rather for the attractive
situation of his town, after remarking that, as a matter of fact, the
small colleges were increasing in attendance and resources much more
rapidly, in proportion, than the great universities. His own college,
in the last five years, had enlarged its endowment from three hundred
thousand to nearly a million dollars, and its attendance from two
to nearly four hundred students. Five hundred was to be the limit,
the president and his faculty being unanimous in believing that no
college should be too large to give attention to every student every
day in every class. “This was sufficiently reassuring,” said Professor
Maturin, as he told me about it, “to permit my attending comfortably to
my surroundings, which were indeed charming.” I continue the account in
his own words.

“The college campus stretched along the main street, at the southern
end of the town--a large rectangle of wonderful greensward, resulting
from the English recipe of watering for a hundred years, and guarded by
a small army of enormous elms that must have been already in occupation
when the tract was bought from the provincial proprietors, in the early
years of the republic. Here stood the two buildings that accommodated
all the academic and domestic life of the college during its first
half century. Both of native limestone, with softer brownstone
trimmings, the older was a notable example of the best American public
architecture of an hundred years ago. The dozen other buildings nearby
were similarly landmarks in the later history of the institution.

“The brownstone and dark brick chapel gave its lower floor to the
libraries of the college and the literary societies, which made a total
of about forty thousand volumes, some of them purchased and imported
in bulk by the founders of the college. For student use the collection
seemed quite adequate, not indeed for specialization, but certainly
for the fundamental, general training for which the college stood.
The work of the freshman and sophomore years consisted largely of
required subjects, the junior and senior years largely of electives.
This system, long in vogue, proved most acceptable, particularly to
such graduates as my friend the professor, who had taken in college,
Latin, Greek, French, and German; much English, some history, and
a little economics; geology, physics, chemistry, physiology, and
hygiene; mathematics up to and including calculus and astronomy;
logic, psychology, ethics, and an introduction to philosophy--surely a
broad foundation for his subsequent specialization in history. Later
experience made him wish that he had studied also biology, sociology,
and something of music and the fine arts. The first two of these were
now provided by the institution.

“I had long heard of the president of the college as a distinguished
clergyman and a more than kindly man. My first meeting with him left
an impression of rarely mingled strength and fineness that every
subsequent conversation but confirmed and deepened. I saw most of
the professors, next morning, ranged on the chapel platform, and
I subsequently learned to know all of them, either personally, or
through my friend’s characterizations. This acquaintance was entirely
in rebuttal of the charge that all professors belong to the mutually
exclusive classes of those who know their subjects and those who love
their students. These professors, almost to a man, managed to do both.
The amount of wise and kindly personal consideration given to every
student was little short of incredible, and had notable results in both
character and culture. A better-mannered set of undergraduates I never
saw, and this in spite of the fact that the freshmen indicated, for
the most part, that the college had to work with more than ordinarily
raw material. Something in the atmosphere added a fineness to the
prevailing vigor, which delighted the eyes of a visitor accustomed to
city anaemia, and produced a host of generous customs like doffing the
hat to professors and standing in chapel while the president passed.

“I could not see that my friend’s very considerable scholarship was
hindered by the obligation that he felt to know the name and something
of the nature of each of his students. Indeed, I think that it was
rather helped. His intellectual life had a freedom from dreaminess, on
the one hand, and from pedantry, on the other, that I could attribute
to no other cause. Such constant and intimate contact with youthful
immaturity and ignorance would probably cause deterioration in a man
of inferior ability and training, but my friend was both able and well
trained, and so were most of his colleagues. His college course had
been immediately followed by a year at one American university, and two
years at another. Then, after an interval of teaching, he had had six
months in England and a year and a half on the Continent, finishing in
Germany with a doctor’s degree and a dissertation of real historical
value. The others had had similar experiences, the language men,
particularly, having enjoyed prolonged foreign residence.

“I was interested to learn that the head of the department of
English, although an inspiring teacher and a writer of originality
and distinction, had never been to college at all, but had gained
his training and had amassed his really notable scholarship entirely
through private instruction, individual reading, and extensive travel,
and had come to his professorship only after a successful career
as a critic and an editor. I was sufficiently impressed by this to
inquire of the president how he avoided the requirement I had heard
more than one university officer make, that every instructor should be
the possessor of a doctor’s degree. He answered almost abruptly: ‘In
selecting our staff, as everything else, we try to ignore the union
label. It is always the sign of the conventional, and the conventional,
especially in the humanities, too often means the mediocre.’ And then
he changed the subject. That was surely radical educational doctrine,
but in this case, at least, it was certainly justified by the results.

“In fine, the faculty seemed to me quite equal to the average of
a university staff, and, because of their constant accessibility,
appeared to be considerably more influential as teachers of immature
students.

“Most of the professors lived near the college. My friend was the
owner of an attractive small house, with a bit of ground, opposite
the campus, computing the entire carrying cost at less than three
hundred dollars a year. Adequate food and service were equally
available and cheap. ‘Indeed, I have,’ he said, very earnestly,--I
take pains to quote him exactly,--‘I have the smallest quarrel that
it is possible to have with the academic income. Ours is not the ill
fortune of those professors who suffer privation because ambitious
presidents and business-like trustees agree that advertising is better
than instruction, and spend on unessential but showy buildings funds
that would relieve the men on their staff from financial anxieties
distracting in themselves and occasioning those efforts to earn from
outside sources which so often seriously undermine a professor’s
academic usefulness, if not his intellectual and physical health. We
manage to live on the two thousand dollars which is the professorial
stipend here, knowing that proportion of the income of the college
to be a generous proof of its belief in the primary importance of
instruction. We decrease the numerator to suit the denominator. We
seek the simplest food, clothing, and furnishings; reduce service to a
minimum; buy fewer books; take shorter vacations; give less to charity,
and nothing to public causes. Not being able to have what we want,
we succeed pretty well in enjoying what we have, sustained by the
intellectual and moral satisfactions of our calling--except sometimes.
We, of course, become accustomed to the humiliating knowledge that the
public does not consider our labor and devotion worth paying highly
for. But the realization that the meagreness of our incomes, by more
and more separating our lives from those of other men, is steadily
decreasing our usefulness and influence--that is at times hard to bear.

“‘So far as living in a small town is concerned, save for the spice
of variety which one may store up in vacation, it furnishes ideal
nourishment for the intellectual life. The time at one’s command seems
almost inexhaustible, and there are practically no distractions. Our
social circle is limited, but interesting. Lacking the opera, our
ladies become fair pianists. In place of museums of art, they have a
club that studies art appreciation and history. Instead of going to the
theatre, we read and talk of books, of which we know a few well rather
than many slightly. Being devoid of the opportunity and hence free
from the obligation of winnowing the current ephemera of my specialty,
I am constantly occupied, instead, with the monumental, permanent
contributions to the subject. One cannot do both things, and I am
content with my enforced choice.’

“The students were unquestionably gainers by their rural environment.
They evidently studied a great deal, that being the most interesting
occupation available. The cheapness of the place enabled many of them
to obtain for a low tuition and a ridiculously low cost of living,
a training they would elsewhere have been unable to pay for. For
recreation they spent much time in the gymnasium, on the athletic
field, and wandering far through the charming surrounding country.
There was a not unhealthy amount of what is known as college and class
spirit, with the numerous traditional customs thereto attendant.

“I could not see that the fraternities, which played a large part in
the student life, did anything more than give to natural tastes and
tendencies an organization that helped the student to see qualities,
and the faculty to watch defects, in the mass. The religious life
of the place impressed me as abundant and powerful, but in no way
overstrained. When I saw some of the young ladies whose habit it was
to be at home to students on Friday evenings, I wished myself a youth
again. The boys repaid their kindness in many ways, not the least
pleasing of which was the serenading which invariably followed the
closing of the fraternity meetings, which were held from ten o’clock
to midnight on the night preceding the weekly holiday--a custom that
seemed to satisfy the youthful desire to act very much grown up, at the
small price of consequent sleepiness. The healthy spirit of the place
frowned on actual dissipation.

“Thinking over my visit, during the return journey, I realized that
the whole question of the relative usefulness of the metropolitan
university and the rural college reduces to an estimate of the
comparative values of the large and the small, the near and the remote,
of efficiency and culture. Our national environment and history have
emphasized the importance of the large, the immediate, the efficient.
But there is always much to be said on both sides of every question,
and it is at least possible that enough importance has not been
attributed to the small, the distinctive, the fine.

“On the whole,” concluded Professor Maturin, “I am inclined to disagree
with my friends in the universities, and to believe that the future of
the small college is bright rather than dark.”




XXI

_Old Town Revisited_


I found Professor Maturin, the other evening, recently returned from a
visit to the home of his youth with a bundle of such pleasant memories
that I set them down as nearly in his own words as possible, without
any of the inquiries and the interruptions of appreciation that they
inevitably drew from me.

“In the first part of the journey thither, repeated efforts failed to
conjure up anything like a full and definite picture of the place. But,
suddenly, as so often happens, the mists of memory cleared, and it
seemed as though I had never been away. This almost theatrical change
causing me to look about with surprise, I became quickly aware that the
train had swung into the beginning of what we used to call ‘The Happy
Valley.’ With a sigh of content, I sank back into the comfort of old
adjustments, with a sense of their completeness that could come only
from a knowledge of later maladjustments to compare them with.

“This valley, perhaps a hundred miles long and from a dozen to a score
of miles wide, is walled in by blue mountain ridges of from twelve to
two thousand feet in height, their bases sweeping nearer or farther
and their sky-lines higher or lower in a series of almost symmetrical
curves. The same restrained variety characterizes the surface of the
valley, which billows and rolls throughout like a solidified section of
mid-ocean. The mountains, foothills, and small patches of the valley
are still covered with oak and chestnut, pine and cedar timber, which
make springtime delightful and the autumn splendid. Elsewhere all is
fertile farm land, squarely fenced or marked with low walls of ever
available limestone, which also provides firm, smooth roads stretching
in every direction over hill and meadow. Many farm-houses and barns
are built of this stone, softened with the mellowness of years. Later
structures of local brick with slate roofs seem scarcely less sturdy.

“This same pleasant variety of surface and solidity of building
characterizes the town itself. Cheerful two-and-one-half story houses,
of red brick, with green shutters still prevail, although about the
central square and along the business blocks the height is usually
greater. I well remember the builder of the first three-story house in
town. The first four-story structure was reared in my boyhood. Its
completion was celebrated with fire-works and the first electric lights
seen in the town. Now there are even cut-stone bank fronts, and they
are building an apartment house and a five-story department store.
Near the edges of the town, where the dwellings stand back from the
streets with lawns and flowers and trees, the march of improvement is
particularly noticeable--as indeed it well might be, for the place has
doubled in size since I left.

“These dwellings indicated to me that local prosperity had caused the
tide of physical well-being to rise to the second or shelter stage.
Formerly, ideas of luxury centred chiefly in food, which was consumed
in a variety and abundance that would have made a dietitian shudder.
The land is still one of plenty and good cheer, and a progress through
the town would delight the monarch who said, ‘Let me have men about me
that are fat,’ but other creature comforts have come to be considered
also. The stage of personal adornment has yet to be reached: the men
seldom have their hair trimmed or their trousers pressed, and the
costume of the women is simple. The local attention to such matters
seemed interestingly different from the metropolitan order of clothing,
shelter, food.

“But as it was not progress that I had chiefly come to see, I found
myself returning repeatedly to the old town hall, which once sheltered
the oldest bank and is still surmounted by a tower of strange local
architecture, bearing an equally erratic clock. All this, like
everything else in the place, seemed by no means so large or so
imposing as I had remembered it, and the bank’s disappearance prevented
the repetition of our one local author’s jest concerning ‘the bank
where the wild thyme grows.’ But when I once more climbed the tower
and picked out, one by one, the old landmarks, I felt all of my early
fondness for the place return. No one, I believe, can be without a
certain proprietary affection for a place upon which he has often
looked down from a tower.

“There, above the town, my memory of many of its personages became
vivid. First, always, we admired the old Governor--we never called him
‘ex,’ although he had been that for many years. A fine, burly figure,
even in old age, he was usually seen driving to or from his model farms
in a vehicle which must have antedated the one-hoss shay. And he seldom
passed without some one relating how, when a misguided ram, not being
in position to be awed by his countenance, had made the conventional
attack, he expanded to his fullest height and, with his favorite,
historic, expletive, thundered: ‘Continental dam, sheep! What do you
mean?’

“The Senator, who logically came next, was by no means so impressive;
for, being regarded chiefly as a provider of political places, he was
forced, when he walked abroad, to assume an abstraction profound enough
to make him oblivious of the hungry eyes of his constituents. I fear
that his was not a happy life, at least when he was at home, which grew
to be more and more seldom.

“The General, however, loved to parade his tall, proud figure. It
was currently reported that he wore stays; certainly he carried his
shoulders always ready for epaulettes and his head poised for a
chapeau. For years he longed to be elected a Congressman, but always
in vain. A tradition that he had once compared a poor man to a wet
dog embodied the popular distrust of his aristocratic nature; and
his set speech of compliment to each village where he spoke--that
the fairness of its daughters almost persuaded him to renounce his
bachelorhood--usually waked sarcasm rather than applause.

“After the General came the Colonel, an attorney so genial that,
it was said, he habitually bowed to trees and hitching-posts, from
mere force of habit. Every one suspected him of storing up popularity
against the day when he might run for office. Whether he ever compassed
or even desired such an end, I do not know.

“The Town Beauty, I learned, had long since married an officer in the
army. We had, I think, even more than our share of handsome girls,
but to gaze upon her was such an unalloyed delight that she came to
be prized as one of the chief attractions of the town. It used to be
said, jocosely, that after visitors had seen the new court house, they
were always made to wait until she passed, before any one would show
them the way to the fair grounds. Certainly she never disappointed the
fondest anticipations, except during one sad season when the whole town
mourned. Most inexcusably she had attempted to improve the lily and the
rose of her complexion by means of a cosmetic, which must have been
devised solely to further the sale of the same manufacturer’s healing
lotions. The damage wrought was most distressing, and recovery was slow
and anxious, but happily complete. There was some desire to express the
public anxiety that there should be no more such experiments; but the
lesson had been learned, and thereafter her loveliness only bloomed the
richer.

“The persons mentioned were all conspicuous members of the local
aristocracy, to which the professions of law, and, to a lesser
degree, of medicine, were the open sesame. The chief members of these
professions, together with all such persons as were distinguished for
family, and a selection from those who were distinguished for wealth,
made up a somewhat exclusive social set, which gave an annual ball,
invited friends to dinner, and went on vacations--sometimes even to
Europe. As for the great majority, the men were devoted chiefly to
business and sometimes to politics; the women to their homes and their
churches, which last regulated all of their social as well as their
religious activities.

“For the recreation of our elders there was always a great deal of
driving. It was possible to keep a carriage on an income that would
not suffice for that alone in the metropolis. The carriage roads were
and still are excellent and the country charming, with here and there
a stately old manor house for historic atmosphere. Even then the
mountains were frequently resorted to. Now they are easily accessible,
and boast not only numerous hotels, but many cottages to which the
more fortunate go back and forth daily in summer. To my boyhood the
mountains represented not only untamed nature, but their hotels were
outposts of the great world beyond. The mountains represented history
also, for on the side of one was a battlefield, marked with a huge
cairn of stones; and they meant literature, as well, for in one of the
gaps was the home of an author whose novels and poems were in the town
library.

“With us young people bicycles were popular to a degree that once, in
the days of the old, high wheels, drew even a national meet to the old
town. But the simple attractions of the place palled on our travelled
guests, and the occasion began to look like a failure until, in the
evening, the entertainment committee got together and started a false
alarm of fire, which allowed the visitors to pull the hand-apparatus
of the local fire companies madly about the streets, until their
superabundant energies were exhausted and they went to bed happy.

“These volunteer fire companies were centres of the most intense
interest, making up in anticipation and preparation for the practical
efficiency which, happily, they were seldom called upon to demonstrate.
They held innumerable initiations, elections, anniversaries, and
reorganizations; and they were always considering, with infinite
attention to detail, the adoption of new uniforms and the purchase of
new equipment. All of which we youngsters ardently emulated with an
organization which, in a vocabulary more aspiring than accurate, we
called ‘The Juneviles.’

“Even more, if possible, than by the fire companies, our interest was
stirred by the annual county fair, which, for four days in the autumn,
crowded the town with visitors and filled the central square, of
evenings, with all sorts of travelling mountebanks. This was eagerly
welcomed as practically our only opportunity for familiarity with the
histrionic art, for the attractions of the town theatre were not of a
sort to be generally approved. I remember, however, attending at least
one performance there when young enough to be tremendously puzzled by
the difficulties of a harlequin in attempting to get through a wall the
door of which mysteriously changed from place to place, while from time
to time the wall became all doors or showed no doors at all.

“Sometimes the few bookish people gathered into reading clubs or
welcomed visiting lecturers, who also conducted discussions and
criticised essays, when anybody wrote them. The only lecture that I
recall dealt with Rugby, and impressed me partly for Tom Brown’s sake,
but chiefly because on that occasion the most sensitive man in the town
covered himself with confusion by absent-mindedly clapping his hands
together in pursuit of a mosquito, with the effect of applauding loudly
at a most inappropriate time. The after-lecture discussions struck me
then as very learned, but I judge now that I must have been easily
impressed, since the only specimen that I remember was the statement
that ‘Carlyle was a bear, wallowing in a sea of words,’ made by the
principal of the high school.

“Even now I should consider him as remarkable as his rhetoric. For he
was not only the official head of the dozen schools in his building,
but he also taught, alone and unaided, all of the classes in the high
school, preparing us for college in every subject from algebra to
zoölogy, and doing it well. His only limitation was that he chewed
tobacco, secretly, or as secretly as he was able with the eyes of
thirty boys constantly upon him.

“Not the least interesting feature of my visit was the opportunity it
provided for noting the present status of old schoolmates. Most of
them had developed in directions that might have been anticipated
from their youthful traits. Even the fact that two of the most
harum-scarum had become responsible bank directors was explained by
the remembrance that youthful lawlessness may often represent merely a
superabundance of excellent energy. The school dreamer had become the
chief confectioner of the town, expending his imagination on a new-art
shop and a summer garden lighted by the electric eyes of Cheshire cats
and owls perched in the trees. The serious boy had acquired practice
as a physician until his stout body and large head seemed bursting
with incommunicable knowledge concerning the local human comedy. The
clever boy had become a successful attorney, more than satisfied with
his profession as an excellent working hypothesis in an unintelligible
world. The boy who had become a musician pleased me, perhaps, most of
all. With a talent that would win distinction anywhere, he rejected
the distractions of cities for a simple environment, where he might
discover and develop his spontaneous self.

“If those that I had known as boys were now men, those I had known as
mature were now old. The fine old clergyman who for years had led in
every movement for things of good report now saw much of his seed
bring forth abundantly, and had, moreover, the personal satisfaction of
knowing that his youngest son had won distinction as the first Rhodes
scholar from his state. The one local artist, a landscape painter,
still pursued with modest determination his honest, if undistinguished,
toil. The old florist was still the finest of idealists in his devotion
to nature, irrespective of worldly considerations. I was happy to note
that he seemed to have prospered materially, in spite of his fondness
for giving and his distaste for selling his plants.

“One or two old men that I had known were still able to regale me
with memories of ‘the Rebellion,’ and of the installation of the town
water-works. But most of my familiars of that generation had passed
away. The two old admirals who had so strangely chosen such an inland
berth for their final cruise, the old doctor who urged his horse by
explosively uttering the words ‘effervescent’ and ‘fundamental,’
the little old librarian with his fondness for Josephus, and the
sadly wheezy conductor of ‘the Madrigal Club’--even the decayed old
gentlewoman who wore different colored wigs to suit her gowns--all had
passed on.

“But, in spite of many such absences, and of some sadder memories,
my visit was one of profound and lasting pleasure. I did not mind the
omniscient small-town scrutiny, which somehow apprised my friends of
all that I had been doing, even before I called. And I found the whole
place full of the most delightful little interests, even for one who
has so little of ‘the restless analyst’ about him. From the point of
view of contrasting the residential values of capital and province,
the advantages of the old town are, perhaps, largely of a negative
character. But all the essentials of life are there, although in
little, and success being so much less difficult, and failure so much
less disastrous, the balance of vitality left over is satisfyingly
large. It was not at all a bad place to spend one’s youth, and it would
be by no means a bad setting for one’s old age.”




XXII

_The County Fair_


I found Professor Maturin deeply pondering, the other evening, the
season when the county fair stirs semi-rural communities, all over the
land, with anticipation, realization, and fresh reminiscence. “No one
of our institutions for pleasure or profit,” said he, “is more firmly
established; and yet students of local manners and customs and of
social psychology appear to have given it small attention, and there is
no notable record of it in literature, save that by Mr. Howells in the
beginning of ‘The Coast of Bohemia.’ Its phenomena, however, are easily
ascertainable by any one who has rural acquaintance or access to rural
newspapers.”

I asked him to instruct me concerning the subject, and he continued
substantially as follows:

“For weeks before the great occasion these newspapers record and
reflect the steady growth of the greatest enthusiasm of the year.
Meetings of the Fair Association begin, and become more and more
frequent, until it is announced that the secretary will be at his
office daily. Immediately thereafter rumors spread, or are spread,
concerning larger exhibits than ever before, of live stock, of
machinery, of household entries; in short, of everything.

“Extra offices are ostentatiously opened for every sort of entry,
and are as ostentatiously filled with more and more assistants, who
periodically and publicly exhaust their entire supply of exhibit tags.
After a secretly anxious interval the officers of the association
begin to smile over the conscious possession of actual cash paid for
concessions, and lavishly hire a negro of aldermanic proportions, in
a costume boasting three hundred and fourteen brilliant patches and
two hundred and three assorted buttons, to parade the streets in the
interests of advertising.

“At the last meeting but one before the fair, it is officially
announced that the ‘outlook is for the greatest collection of exhibits
ever entered,’ and the association decides, out of the fullness of its
heart and pockets, to equip the new barn with electric lights, and to
issue complimentary tickets to all clergymen who apply for them.

“At the same meeting it awards the ‘feed privilege,’ and appoints
judges, ticket-takers, grandstand ushers, and many guards, under
the command of a military train-announcer, together with various
unnecessary marshals and sundry mysterious functionaries known as
‘hill-men’ and ‘hatchet-men.’ All of these, especially the night
guards, speedily become heroes in the now almost painfully wide-open
eyes of the town’s small boys.

“The Poultry Fanciers’ Association likewise begins to hold frequent
meetings, planning its own exhibits and its entertainments for visiting
exhibitors, and announcing that silver cups may be given as prizes, in
which event the cups also will be exhibited. Finally, at least one cup
makes its appearance, and is displayed in advance, surrounded by many
ribbon rosettes and streamers destined for such happy birds as are only
less than the best.

“Hotel and restaurant keepers hungrily furbish up old and install new
equipment, increase their attendance and provide music, and make bids
for the reward of virtue by refusing entertainment to such undesirable
citizens as Mormon missionaries. Local real estate booms more loudly
than ever, and local commerce plumes and preens itself with all kinds
of ‘openings’ and ‘fair-week bargains.’ It keeps a jealous eye on
competition, requiring visiting street vendors to keep moving; but it
is so hospitable to visiting custom that when visiting custom’s sleepy
children tumble into its show-cases, it grandly refuses to accept
payment for the resulting damage.

“And now ‘the Midway’ begins to cast its lights and shadows before.
Its prospective patrons sorrow over the enforced absence of the glass
swallower, who has at last succumbed to the rigors of his profession.
But they are felicitous over the return of the electric woman, and
look forward with eager anticipation to the yet untasted delights of
riding on a ‘sea-wave,’ and of throwing rings at the heads of a flock
of live geese. They read with avidity long newspaper accounts, by
correspondents who sign themselves ‘1t,’ of the approaching Russian
midget and the Igorrote village; and the report that two balloonists
are contesting for a concession distracts them between the comparative
merits of a real wedding in mid-air and a cannon that shoots an
aeronaut and a parachute.

“Meanwhile ‘Ten Nights in a Bar-Room’ comes to town with a tent and
a band that parades, but so few persons attend that no performances
are given. Local entertainers, however, climb to the very pinnacle
of competition. The Family Theatre provides ‘An Entire Change of
Programme!’ and the Academy of Music presents ‘A Repertoire Company of
World Wide Reputation!!!’ The skating rink advertises a new floor,
and a grand opening, with decorations of American flags and Japanese
lanterns. And the dancing academy announces a series of fair-week
dances with a new palm-room capable of seating an orchestra of six
pieces.

“Soon the zest of danger is added to the local frame of mind by the
appearance of two men ‘from away,’ who appear dissatisfied with all the
watches that the leading jeweller can display, until it is learned,
after their departure, that they have taken several with them for
more leisurely examination. Thereupon all strangers are looked upon
with suspicion, doors and windows are doubly locked; valuables are
guarded; and local justice warns or incarcerates on suspicion the best
or worst-known local offenders, and congratulates the town on the loss
of fewer horses, watches, and pocket-books than usual. Anxiety over
property, however, at no time approaches that concerning the weather,
which cannot possibly last if it is good, although it will certainly
continue if it is bad.

“Local finance shows its approval of the general course of things by
promising its bank clerks two half-holidays, and local learning smiles
indulgently in paying its teachers earlier than usual, and granting
its pupils a two days’ recess. The Grand Council of the Ancient and
Honorable Order of Fraternity promises its annual visitation during
fair week, and the church endeavors to leaven the worldliness of the
season by announcing the twenty-sixth annual convention of the Woman’s
Home and Foreign Missionary Society.

“When the exhibits actually begin to arrive, one wonders how enthusiasm
can rise higher. The fair grounds present an increasingly busy scene,
until there is scarcely moving room between workmen and wagons.
Incoming teams grow more and more crowded with exhibits and exhibitors,
fakes and fakirs, and, finally, with visitors. Every private house
entertains old friends and new. Public accommodations are taxed to the
utmost, and trading at the city market becomes well-nigh frantic.

“The visitors represent all sorts and conditions of men and women. The
old woman who has never ridden on a railroad train and the old man who
attended the first fair fifty years ago, the veteran who helped defend
the town during the civil war and the business man who is taking his
first vacation in twenty-four years--these divide interest with the
principals in the runaway marriages, of which there are two or three
daily.

“Numerous former residents return for the first time in many years, and
several new families decide to locate permanently. At the last moment
the Governor finds himself unfortunately unable to be present, but the
president of one railroad and the general manager of another come in
private cars, and two rival political candidates are much seen but not
much heard.

“Various other distinguished guests arrive in touring cars, and
countless other less distinguished but equally dust-covered persons
arrive in carriages. Street movement grows very brisk. Buggies clash,
automobiles bump, and trolley cars jump the track; and over all begins
to rise the call of the cabman, ‘Going right out.’ By night all the
shops are brilliant, sidewalks are crowded, and in the square there are
moving picture advertisements, and the flaring torches of vending and
performing fakirs.

“The opening day dawns bright and clear, and every one jubilantly
follows the call of the cabmen, until the town itself seems half
deserted. On the grounds bands boom, marshals gallop, and crowds pour
through and around the buildings. Within one of these, merchants
display pipes and pianos, furniture and furnaces, hardware and
haberdashery, shoes and sewing-machines, carpets and candy, in
apparently endless array.

“On an upper floor the household department demands appreciation for
two thousand four hundred and twenty-four glasses of jelly, six hundred
and fifty-one jars of pickles, three hundred and thirty cakes, and
eighty-nine specimens of homemade soap. Nearby in the department of
fine arts are paper flowers, worsted mottoes, six hundred and fifteen
pieces of embroidery, one hundred and forty-two cushions, four hundred
and forty-three drawings and paintings, and one hundred and ten
curiosities and relics, mostly ‘over one hundred years old.’ Among the
latter the palm is borne by six cocoanut-shell baskets and a tray of
seventeen-year locust shells.

“Elsewhere are many worthy flowers, shrubs, and trees; fruits,
vegetables, and grains--celery a yard tall, pumpkins a yard wide, and
forty-seven varieties of beans. The pavilions and grounds devoted
to machinery present a bewildering array of ploughs, planters,
cultivators, reapers, and stackers; of threshers, separators, huskers,
shellers, cutters, and grinders; of engines and pumps, saws and mills,
and of all things after their kind.

“Every domestic animal, too, after its kind, seems to be represented
in countless pens and stalls, until one tarries only long enough to
sign the Poultry Fanciers’ demand for a new building and to be grateful
for the railroad congestion that has delayed many other exhibits, and
then departs, resolutely undeflected by the charms of the Midway, the
miniature railway, and the innumerable ice-cream, sausage, and popcorn
stands.

“By the second day it is a commonplace that the exhibition is the
greatest ever given; everybody begins to count it nearly half over,
and a few acknowledge that they wish it were. The cabmen complain of
trolley car competition, and a sight-seeing automobile decides that
its license is too high to allow it any profit. Lady visitors complain
that there are not enough seats on the grounds, that admission to the
grandstand is increased to fifty cents, and that the classification
of the fancy work department is years behind the vogue. The judges
of jellies and the connoisseurs of cakes are prostrated after their
investigations into the merits of the two thousand four hundred and
twenty-four and three hundred and thirty specimens to which they have
submitted their respective tastes.

“On Thursday, however, the third and, by tradition, the greatest day,
enthusiasm and optimism return under the stimulus of the largest crowds
the town has ever seen. Nobody can count the people, and estimates of
their number are as inflated and soaring as the great balloon, which
finally does its duty handsomely. Nine trolley cars are counted in the
square at one time; there are eighty passenger coaches in the railroad
yards, and one livery-stable entertains two hundred and thirty-four
visiting horses! People who did not expect them receive premiums, and
the indefatigable Poultry Fanciers have a parade and a banquet, at
which they announce their building as assured.

“On Friday, the final day, the blessing continues to brighten as it
takes its flight. The Fair Association smilingly admits about eight
thousand dollars profit, entertains itself, and its live stock and
machinery exhibitors, at luncheon, promises the Poultry Fanciers their
new building, and utters mysterious hints concerning a great aquarium
for next year. Nothing mars the growing satisfaction save that some
unknown miscreant drops a lighted match into an entrance ticket box and
burns up approximately a bushel of tickets.

“Such are some of the phenomena of the county fair,” concluded
Professor Maturin. “They promise much to any proper scientific and
literary exposition. Here, as everywhere else, we need only a little
more information and a little more intelligence to transform our
contemporary superficiality into a realization of life that is, at the
same time, strong and fine.”




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or alternate spelling has been retained from the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OBSERVATIONS OF PROFESSOR
MATURIN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
